<DF04VS> Not marching now in fields of Trasimene 
Where Mars did mate the Carthaginians, 
Nor sporting in the dalliance of love
In courts of kings where state is overturned,
Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds,	 
Intends our muse to daunt his heavenly verse.
Only this, gentlemen: we must perform
The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad.
To patient judgments we appeal our plaud,
And speak for Faustus in his infancy.
Now is he born, his parents base of stock,
In Germany, within a town called Rhode.
Of riper years to Wittenberg he went,
Whereas his kinsmen chiefly brought him up.
So soon he profits in divinity,	
The fruitful plot of scholarism graced,
That shortly he was graced with doctor's name,
Excelling all whose sweet delight disputes
In heavenly matters of theology;
Till, swoll'n with cunning of a self-conceit,
His waxen wings did mount above his reach, 
And melting heavens conspired his overthrow.
For, falling to a devilish exercise,
And glutted more with learning's golden gifts, 
He surfeits upon cursed necromancy;
Nothing so sweet as magic is to him,
Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss.
And this the man that in his study sits.	
Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin
To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess.
Having commenced, be a divine in show,
Yet level at the end of every art,
And live and die in Aristotle's works.
Sweet Analytics, 'tis thou hast ravished me!
Bene disserere est finis logices.
Is to dispute well logic's chiefest end?
Affords this art no greater miracle?
Then read no more; thou hast attained the end.
A greater subject fitteth Faustus' wit.
Bid On kai me on farewell. Galen, come!
Be a physician, Faustus. Heap up gold,
And be eternized for some wondrous cure.
Summum bonum medicinae sanitas:
The end of physic is our body's health.
Why Faustus, hast thou not attained that end? 
Is not thy common talk sound aphorisms?
Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,
Whereby whole cities have escaped the plague
And thousand desp'rate maladies been eased? 
Yet art thou still but Faustus, and a man. 
Wouldst thou make man to live eternally?
Or, being dead, raise them to life again?	
Then this profession were to be esteemed.
Physic, farewell! Where is Justinian?
Si una eademque res legatur duobus, 
Alter rem, alter valorem rei, etc.
A pretty case of paltry legacies!	
Such is the subject of the Institute
And universal body of the Church.
His study fits a mercenary drudge
Who aims at nothing but external trash	
Too servile and illiberal for me.
When all is done, divinity is best.
Jerome's Bible, Faustus, view it well.
Si peccasse negamus, fallimur
Et nulla est in nobis veritas.
If we say that we have no sin,
We deceive ourselves, and there's no truth in us.	
Ay, we must die an everlasting death.
What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,
What will be, shall be? Divinity, adieu!	
These metaphysics of magicians
And necromantic books are heavenly,
Lines, circles, signs, letters, and characters 
Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.
O, what a world of profit and delight,	
Of power, of honor, of omnipotence,
Is promised to the studious artisan!
All things that move between the quiet poles
Shall be at my command. Emperors and kings
Are but obeyed in their several provinces,
Nor can they raise the wind or rend the clouds;
But his dominion that exceeds in this
Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man.
A sound magician is a mighty god.
Here, Faustus, try thy brains to gain a deity.
Wagner! Commend me to my dearest friends,
The German Valdes and Cornelius.
Request them earnestly to visit me.
Their conference will be a greater help to me	 
Than all my labors, plod I ne'er so fast.
O Faustus, lay that damned book aside
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul
And heap God's heavy wrath upon thy head!
Read, read the Scriptures. That is blasphemy.	
Go forward, Faustus, in that famous art
Wherein all nature's treasury is contained.
Be thou on earth as Jove is in the sky,
Lord and commander of these elements.
How am I glutted with conceit of this!	
Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,
Resolve me of all ambiguities,
Perform what desperate enterprise I will?
I'll have them fly to India for gold,
Ransack the ocean for orient pearl,	
And search all corners of the new-found world
For pleasant fruits and princely delicates.
I'll have them read me strange philosophy
And tell the secrets of all foreign kings.
I'll have them wall all Germany with brass
And make swift Rhine circle fair Wittenberg.
I'll have them fill the public schools with silk,
I'll levy soldiers with the coin they bring
And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,
And reign sole king of all our provinces;
Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war
Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp's bridge
I'll make my servile spirits to invent.
Come, German Valdes and Cornelius,	
And make me blest with your sage conference!
Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,
Know that your words have won me at the last
To practice magic and concealed arts.
Yet not your words only, but mine own fantasy,
That will receive no object, for my head
But ruminates on necromantic skill.
Philosophy is odious and obscure;
Both law and physic arc for petty wits;
Divinity is basest of the three,	
Unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile.
'Tis magic, magic that hath ravished me.
Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt,
And I, that have with concise syllogisms
Gravelled the pastors of the German Church
And made the flow'ring pride of Wittenberg
Swarm to my problems as the infernal spirits
On sweet Musaeus when he came to hell,
Will be as cunning as Agrippa was,
Whose shadows made all Europe honor him.	
Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience 
Shall make all nations to canonize us.
As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords,
So shall the subjects of every element
Be always serviceable to us three.	
Like lions shall they guard us when we please,
Like Almaine rutters with their horsemen's staves,
Or Lapland giants, trotting by our sides;
Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,
Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows
Than in the white breasts of the Queen of Love.
From Venice shall they drag huge argosies,
And from America the golden fleece
That yearly stuffs old Philip's treasury,
If learned Faustus will be resolute.	
Valdes, as resolute am I in this
As thou to live. Therefore object it not.
The miracles that magic will perform
Will make thee vow to study nothing else.
He that is grounded in astrology,	
Enriched with tongues, well seen in minerals,
Hath all the principles magic doth require.
Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowned
And more frequented for this mystery
Than heretofore the Delphian oracle.
The spirits tell me they can dry the sea
And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks 
Ay, all the wealth that our forefathers hid
Within the massy entrails of the earth.
Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?	
Nothing, Cornelius. O, this cheers my soul!
Come, show me some demonstrations magical,
That I may conjure in some lusty grove
And have these joys in full possession.
Then haste thee to some solitary grove,
And bear wise Bacon's and Albanus' works,
The Hebrew Psalter, and New Testament;
And whatsoever else is requisite
We will inform thee ere our conference cease.
Valdes, first let him know the words of art,	
And then, all other ceremonies learned,
Faustus may try his cunning by himself.
First I'll instruct thee in the rudiments,
And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.
Then come and dine with me, and after meat
We'll canvass every quiddity thereof, 
For ere I sleep I'll try what I can do. 
This night I'll conjure, though I die therefore. 
That shall we know, for see, here comes his boy.
O, but I fear me nothing can reclaim him.
Now that the gloomy shadow of the earth, 
Longing to view Orion's drizzling look,
Leaps from th' Antarctic world unto the sky 
And dims the welkin with her pitchy breath,
Faustus, begin thine incantations,	
And try if devils will obey thy hest,
Seeing thou hast prayed and sacrificed to them.
Within this circle is Jehovah's name,
Forward and backward anagrammatised,
The breviated names of holy saints,	
Figures of every adjunct to the heavens,
And characters of signs and erring stars,
By which the spirits are enforced to rise.
Then fear not, Faustus, but be resolute,
And try the uttermost magic can perform.	
I charge thee to return and change thy shape.
Thou art too ugly to attend on me.	
Go, and return an old Franciscan friar;
That holy shape becomes a devil best.
I see there's virtue in my heavenly words.
Who would not be proficient in this art?
How pliant is this Mephistopheles,	
Full of obedience and humility!
Such is the force of magic and my spells.
Now, Faustus, thou art conjurer laureate,
That canst command great Mephistopheles.
	
I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
To do whatever Faustus shall command,
Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere
Or the ocean to overwhelm the world.	
I am a servant to great Lucifer
And may not follow thee without his leave.
No more than he commands must we perform.
Did not he charge thee to appear to me?
No, I came now hither of mine own accord.	
Did not my conjuring speeches raise thee? Speak.
That was the cause, but yet per accidens.
For when we hear one rack the name of God,
Abjure the Scriptures and his Saviour Christ,
We fly in hope to get his glorious soul,	
Nor will we come unless he use such means
Whereby he is in danger to be damned.
Therefore, the shortest cut for conjuring
Is stoutly to abjure the Trinity
And pray devoutly to the prince of hell.	
Already done, and holds this principle:
There is no chief but only Beelzebub,
To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.
This word 'damnation' terrifies not him,
For he confounds hell in Elysium.
His ghost be with the old philosophers!
But leaving these vain trifles of men's souls,
Tell me what is that Lucifer thy lord?
Arch-regent and commander of all spirits.	
Was not that Lucifer an angel once?
Yes, Faustus, and most dearly loved of God. 
How comes it then that he is prince of devils? 
O, by aspiring pride and insolence,
For which God threw him from the face of heaven.	
And what are you that live with Lucifer?
Unhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer,
Conspired against our God with Lucifer,
And are for ever damned with Lucifer.
How comes it then that thou art out of hell? 
Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it.
Think'st thou that I, who saw the face of God
And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells
In being deprived of everlasting bliss?
O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
Which strike a terror to my fainting soul!
What, is great Mephistopheles so passionate	
For being deprived of the joys of heaven?
Learn thou of Faustus' manly fortitude,
And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.
Go bear these tidings to great Lucifer:
Seeing Faustus hath incurred eternal death 
By desp'rate thoughts against Jove's deity,
Say he surrenders up to him his soul,
So he will spare him four-and-twenty years,
Letting him live in all voluptuousness,
Having thee ever to attend on me,
To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
To tell me whatsoever I demand,
To slay mine enemies and aid my friends,
And always be obedient to my will.
Go and return to mighty Lucifer,
And meet me in my study at midnight,
And then resolve me of thy master's mind. 
Had I as many souls as there be stars, 
I'd give them all for Mephistopheles.
By him I'll be great emperor of the world
To pass the ocean with a band of men;
I'll join the hills that bind the Afric shore
And both contributory to my crown.
The Emp'ror shall not live but by my leave, 
Nor any potentate of Germany.
Now that I have obtained what I desire,
I'll live in speculation of this art
Till Mephistopheles return again.
Tell me, sirrah, hast thou any comings in?	
Ay, and goings out too, you may see else.
Qui mihi discipulus? How, in verse?
No, sirrah, in beaten silk and stavesacre.
No, no, here, take your gridirons again.	
Truly, I'll none of them. Truly, but you shall.
What boots it then to think of God or heaven?
Away with such vain fancies and despair!
Despair in God and trust in Beelzebub.	
Now go not backward. No, Faustus, be resolute.
Ay, and Faustus will turn to God again.
The god thou servest is thine own appetite,
Wherein is fixed the love of Beelzebub.
To him I'll build an altar and a church,
And offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.
Sweet Faustus, leave that execrable art.	
Contrition, prayer, repentance   what of them?
O, they are means to bring thee unto heaven. 
Rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,
Sweet Faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.	
Why, the seigniory of Emden shall be mine.
When Mephistopheles shall stand by me,
What god can hurt thee, Faustus? Thou art safe;
Cast no more doubts. Come, Mephistopheles,
And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer.
Is't not midnight? Come, Mephistopheles!
Now tell, what says Lucifer thy lord?	
That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he lives, 
So he will buy my service with his soul.
Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee.
But, Faustus, thou must bequeath it solemnly
And write a deed of gift with thine own blood,	 
For that security craves great Lucifer.
If thou deny it, I will back to hell.
	
Have you any pain, that tortures others?
As great as have the human souls of men.
But tell me, Faustus, shall I have thy soul?	 
And I will be thy slave, and wait on thee,
And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.
Ay, Mephistopheles, I give it thee.
And bind thy soul that at some certain day	
Great Lucifer may claim it as his own,
And then be thou as great as Lucifer.
Lo, Mephistopheles, for love of thee
I cut mine arm, and with my proper blood
Chief lord and regent of perpetual night.
View here the blood that trickles from mine arm,
And let it be propitious for my wish.
Ay, so I will. But Mephistopheles,
My blood congeals, and I can write no more.
Is it unwilling I should write this bill?	
Why streams it not, that I may write afresh?
'Faustus gives to thee his soul'   ah, there it stayed!
Why shouldst thou not? Is not thy soul thine own?
Then write again: 'Faustus gives to thee his soul.'
So; now the blood begins to clear again,
Now will I make an end immediately. 
O, what will not I do to obtain his soul?
Consummatum est. This bill is ended,
And Faustus hath bequeathed his soul to Lucifer.
But what is this inscription on mine arm?
If unto God, he'll throw thee down to hell. 
My senses are deceived; here's nothing writ. 
I see it plain. Here in this place is writ	
'Homo, fuge!' Yet shall not Faustus fly.
I'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.	
Speak, Mephistopheles. What means this show? 
Nothing, Faustus, but to delight thy mind withal
And to show thee what magic can perform.	
But may I raise up spirits when I please?
Ay, Faustus, and do greater things than these. 
Here, Mephistopheles, receive this scroll,
A deed of gift of body and of soul 	
But yet conditionally that thou perform
All articles prescribed between us both.
Faustus, I swear by hell and Lucifer
To effect all promises between us made.
Speak, Faustus. Do you deliver this as your deed?	 
Ay. Take it, and the devil give thee good on't.
First will I question with thee about hell.
Tell me, where is the place that men call hell?	
Under the heavens. Ay, but whereabout?
Within the bowels of these elements, 
Where we are tortured and remain for ever. 
Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscribed
In one self place, for where we are is hell,
And, to conclude, when all the world dissolves, 
And every creature shall be purified,
All places shall be hell that is not heaven.
Ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.
Why, think'st thou then that Faustus shall be damned? 
Ay, of necessity, for here's the scroll
Wherein thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.
Ay, and body too. But what of that?
Tush, these are trifles and mere old wives' tales. 
For I am damned and am now in hell.	 
Well, thou wilt have one. Sit there till I come. 
I'll fetch thee a wife, in the devil's name.	
Tut, Faustus, marriage is but a ceremonial toy. 
If thou lovest me, think no more of it.	
And bring them ev'ry morning to thy bed.
She whom thine eye shall like, thy heart shall have,
Be she as chaste as was Penelope,	
As wise as Saba, or as beautiful	
Hold, take this book. Peruse it thoroughly.
The iterating of these lines brings gold;
The framing of this circle on the ground
Brings whirlwinds, tempests, thunder, and lightning. 
Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,
And men in armour shall appear to thee,
Ready to execute what thou desir'st.
Here they are in this book.  There turn to them.
When I behold the heavens, then I repent 
And curse thee, wicked Mephistopheles,
Because thou hast deprived me of those joys.
Think'st thou heaven is such a glorious thing?	
I tell thee, 'tis not half so fair as thou
If it were made for man, 'twas made for me.	 
I will renounce this magic and repent.
Faustus, repent yet, God will pity thee.
Thou art a spirit. God cannot pity thee.
Who buzzeth in mine ears I am a spirit?
Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;	
Ay, God will pity me if I repent.
My heart's so hardened I cannot repent.
Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven
But fearful echoes thunder in mine ears:	
'Faustus, thou art damned!' Then swords and knives, 
Poison, guns, halters, and envenomed steel
Are laid before me to dispatch myself;
And long ere this I should have slain myself
Had not sweet pleasure conquered deep despair.
Have not I made blind Homer sing to me
Of Alexander's love and Oenone's death?
And hath not he that built the walls of Thebes
With ravishing sound of his melodious harp
Made music with my Mephistopheles?	
Why should I die, then, or basely despair?
I am resolved Faustus shall ne'er repent.
Come, Mephistopheles, let us dispute again
And argue of divine astrology.
Tell me, are there many heavens above the moon?
Are all celestial bodies but one globe,
As is the substance of this centric earth?
As are the elements, such are the spheres, 
Mutually folded in each others' orb;
And, Faustus, all jointly move upon one axletree,	
Whose terminine is termed the world's wide pole.
Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter
Tush, these slender trifles Wagner can decide.
Hath Mephistopheles no greater skill?	
Who knows not the double motion of the planets?
The first is finished in a natural day,
Tush, these are freshmen's suppositions. 
Well, I am answered. Tell me who made the world. 
I will not. Sweet Mephistopheles, tell me.
Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me anything?	 
Think, Faustus, upon God, that made the world. 
Ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell!	 
'Tis thou hast damned distressed Faustus' soul.
Never too late, if Faustus can repent.
If thou repent, devils shall tear thee in pieces.	
Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.
Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just.
There's none but I have int'rest in the same.	
O, who art thou that look'st so terrible?
And this is my companion prince in hell.
O Faustus, they are come to fetch away thy soul!
We come to tell thee thou dost injure us.	 
Thou talk'st of Christ, contrary to thy promise.
Thou shouldst not think of God. Think of the devil,
Nor will I henceforth. Pardon me in this,
And Faustus vows never to look to heaven,
Never to name God or to pray to him,
To burn his Scriptures, slay his ministers,
And make my spirits pull his churches down.
Do so, and we will highly gratify thee.
Talk of the devil, and nothing else. Come away!	
Tut, Faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.
Thou shalt. I will send for thee at midnight.
This will I keep as chary as my life.	
Farewell, Faustus, and think on the devil. 
Farewell, great Lucifer. Come, Mephistopheles.
To know the secrets of astronomy
Graven in the book of Jove's high firmament,
Did mount himself to scale Olympus' top,
Being seated in a chariot burning bright	
Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons' necks.
He now is gone to prove cosmography,
And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome
To see the Pope and manner of his court
And take some part of holy Peter's feast	
That to this day is highly solemnised.	
Having now, my good Mephistopheles,
Passed with delight the stately town of Trier,
Environed round with airy mountain-tops,
With walls of flint and deep intrenched lakes,
Not to be won by any conquering prince;	
From Paris next, coasting the realm of France,
We saw the river Maine fall into Rhine,
Whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines.
Then up to Naples, rich Campania,
Whose buildings, fair and gorgeous to the eye,
The streets straight forth and paved with finest brick, 
Quarters the town in four equivalents.
There saw we learned Maro's golden tomb,
The way he cut an English mile in length
Thorough a rock of stone in one night's space.
From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest,
In midst of which a sumptuous temple stands
That threats the stars with her aspiring top.
Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time.
But tell me now, what resting place is this?	
Conducted me within the walls of Rome?
I hope his Holiness will bid us welcome.
And now, my Faustus, that thou mayst perceive
What Rome containeth to delight thee with,	
Know that this city stands upon seven hills
That underprops the groundwork of the same.
Just through the midst runs flowing Tiber's stream,
With winding banks that cut it in two parts,
Over the which four stately bridges lean,	
That makes safe passage to each part of Rome.
Upon the bridge called Ponte Angelo
Erected is a castle passing strong,
Within whose walls such store of ordnance are,
And double cannons, framed of carved brass,	
As match the days within one complete year 
Besides the gates and high pyramides
Which Julius Caesar brought from Africa.
Now, by the kingdoms of infernal rule,
Of Styx, Acheron, and the fiery lake	
Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear
That I do long to see the monuments
And situation of bright splendent Rome.
Nay, Faustus, stay. I know you'd fain see the Pope
And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
Where thou shalt see a troupe of bald-pate friars
Whose summum bonum is in belly cheer.
Well, I am content to compass then some sport,
And by their folly make us merriment.	 
My lord of Lorraine, will't please you draw near?
Fall to, and the devil choke you an you spare.
How now, who's that which spake? Friars, look about. 
Here's nobody, if it like your Holiness.
	
	
What again?   My lord, I'll drink to your Grace. 
Come on, Mephistopheles. What shall we do?
How? Bell, book, and candle, candle, book, and bell, 
Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell.
Because it is Saint Peter's holy day.
Hush, I'll gull him supernaturally. 
Drawer, I hope all is paid. God be with you. 
I must say somewhat to your fellow you, sir.
Well, t' one of you hath this goblet about you.
Monarch of hell, under whose black survey
Great potentates do kneel with awful fear,	 
Upon whose altars thousand souls do lie,
How am I vexed with these villains' charms!
From Constantinople am I hither come
Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.
When Faustus had with pleasure ta'en the view
Of rarest things and royal courts of kings,
He stayed his course and so returned home,
Where such as bear his absence but with grief 
I mean his friends and nearest companions 
Did gratulate his safety with kind words.
And in their conference of what befell,
Touching his journey through the world and air,
They put forth questions of astrology,
Which Faustus answered with such learned skill	
As they admired and wondered at his wit.
Now is his fame spread forth in every land.
Amongst the rest the Emperor is one,
Carolus the Fifth, at whose palace now
Faustus is feasted 'mongst his noblemen.	
What there he did in trial of his art
I leave untold, your eyes shall see performed.	
Then, Doctor Faustus, mark what I shall say.
As I was sometime solitary set
Within my closet, sundry thoughts arose
About the honor of mine ancestors 
How they had won by prowess such exploits,
Got such riches, subdued so many kingdoms
As we that do succeed or they that shall
I fear me, never attain to that degree
Of high renown and great authority.
Amongst which kings is Alexander the Great,
Chief spectacle of the world's pre-eminence,
The bright shining of whose glorious acts
Lightens the world with his reflecting beams 
As when I hear but motion made of him,
It grieves my soul I never saw the man.
If, therefore, thou by cunning of thine art
Canst raise this man from hollow vaults below
Where lies entombed this famous conqueror,
And bring with him his beauteous paramour,
Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire
They used to wear during their time of life,	
Thou shalt both satisfy my just desire
And give me cause to praise thee whilst I live.
Nay, an you go to conjuring, I'll be gone.	
Thou damned wretch and execrable dog, 
Bred in the concave of some monstrous rock,
How dar'st thou thus abuse a gentleman?
Villain, I say, undo what thou hast done.
O, not so fast, sir. There's no haste but good.
Farewell, Master Doctor. Yet, ere you go,
Expect from me a bounteous reward.
Now, Mephistopheles, the restless course 	
That time doth run with calm and silent foot,
Short'ning my days and thread of vital life,
Calls for the payment of my latest years.
Therefore, sweet Mephistopheles, let us make haste
What, will you go on horseback or on foot? 
Nay, till I am past this fair and pleasant green,
Why, sir, will he not drink of all waters?
What art thou, Faustus, but a man condemned to die?
Thy fatal time doth draw to final end.	 
Despair doth drive distrust unto my thoughts.
Confound these passions with a quiet sleep. 
Tush! Christ did call the thief upon the cross; 
Then rest thee, Faustus, quiet in conceit.
Why, sir, what would you? You cannot speak with him.	 
Why, he's fast asleep. Come some other time.
I tell thee he has not slept this eight nights.	
Alas, I am undone! What shall I do?	 
I am glad they content you so, madam.
Where you must well reward this learned man
For the great kindness he hath showed to you.
And so I will, my lord, and whilst I live	
I think my master means to die shortly,
For he hath given to me all his goods.
And yet methinks if that death were near
He would not banquet and carouse and swill
Amongst the students, as even now he doth,	
Who are at supper with such belly-cheer
As Wagner ne'er beheld in all his life.
See where they come. Belike the feast is ended. 
For that I know your friendship is unfeigned,
And Faustus' custom is not to deny
The just requests of those that wish him well,	
You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece
No otherways for pomp and majesty
Than when Sir Paris crossed the seas with her
And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.
Be silent then, for danger is in words.	
Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,
Whom all the world admires for majesty.
No marvel though the angry Greeks pursued 
With ten years' war the rape of such a queen,
Whose heavenly beauty passeth all compare.	
Since we have seen the pride of nature's works 
And only paragon of excellence,
Let us depart; and for this glorious deed
Happy and blest be Faustus evermore.
Gentlemen, farewell. The same I wish to you.	
Ah, Doctor Faustus, that I might prevail
To guide thy steps unto the way of life,
By which sweet path thou mayst attain the goal
That shall conduct thee to celestial rest!
Break heart, drop blood, and mingle it with tears 
Tears falling from repentant heaviness
Of thy most vile and loathsome filthiness,
The stench whereof corrupts the inward soul
With such flagitious crimes of heinous sins
As no commiseration may expel	
But mercy, Faustus, of thy Saviour sweet,
Whose blood alone must wash away thy guilt.
Where art thou, Faustus? Wretch, what hast thou done? 
Damned art thou, Faustus, damned! Despair and die!
Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voice	 
Ah, stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps!
I see an angel hovers o'er thy head,
And with a vial full of precious grace	
Offers to pour the same into thy soul.
Then call for mercy and avoid despair.
Leave me a while to ponder on my sins	
I go, sweet Faustus, but with heavy cheer,
Fearing the ruin of thy hopeless soul.	
Accursed Faustus, where is mercy now?
I do repent, and yet I do despair.
Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast.	
What shall I do to shun the snares of death?
Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul
For disobedience to my sovereign lord.
Revolt, or I'll in piecemeal tear thy flesh.
Sweet Mephistopheles, entreat thy lord	
To pardon my unjust presumption,
And with my blood again I will confirm
My former vow I made to Lucifer.
Do it then quickly, with unfeigned heart,
Lest greater danger do attend thy drift.	
Torment, sweet friend, that base and crooked age
That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,
With greatest torments that our hell affords.
His faith is great. I cannot touch his soul.
But what I may afflict his body with
I will attempt, which is but little worth.
One thing, good servant, let me crave of thee
To glut the longing of my heart's desire:
That I might have unto my paramour
That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,	
Whose sweet embracings may extinguish clean
These thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,
And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer.
Faustus, this, or what else thou shalt desire,
Shall be performed in twinkling of an eye.
Was this the face that launched a thousand ships 
And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?
Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
Her lips sucks forth my soul. See where it flies!
Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.	
Here will I dwell, for heaven be in these lips,
And all is dross that is not Helena.
I will be Paris, and for love of thee
Instead of Troy shall Wittenberg be sacked,
And I will combat with weak Menelaus,	
And wear thy colors on my plumed crest.
Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel
And then return to Helen for a kiss.
O, thou art fairer than the evening air,
Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars.	
Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
When he appeared to hapless Semele,
More lovely than the monarch of the sky
In wanton Arethusa's azured arms;
And none but thou shalt be my paramour.	
Accursed Faustus, miserable man,
That from thy soul exclud'st the grace of heaven 
And fliest the throne of His tribunal seat!
Satan begins to sift me with his pride.
As in this furnace God shall try my faith,	
My faith, vile hell, shall triumph over thee
Ambitious fiends, see how the heavens smiles
At your repulse and laughs your state to scorn!
Hence, hell! For hence I fly unto my God.
Now hast thou but one bare hour to live,
And then thou must be damned perpetually.
Stand still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,
That time may cease and midnight never come!
Fair nature's eye, rise, rise again, and make	 
Perpetual day; or let this hour be but
A year, a month, a week, a natural day,
That Faustus may repent and save his soul!
O lente, lente currite noetis equi!
The stars move still; time runs; the clock will strike;	
The devil will come, and Faustus must be damned.
Where is it now? 'Tis gone; and see where God
Stretcheth out his arm and bends his ireful brows!
Mountains and hills, come, come and fall on me,
And hide me from the heavy wrath of God!	
Then will I headlong run into the earth.
Earth, gape! O, no, it will not harbor me.
You stars that reigned at my nativity,
Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,	
Now draw up Faustus like a foggy mist
Into the entrails of yon laboring cloud,
That when you vomit forth into the air,
My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
So that my soul may but ascend to heaven.	
If thou wilt not have mercy on my soul,
Yet for Christ's sake, whose blood hath ransomed me,	
Impose some end to my incessant pain.
Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
A hundred thousand, and at last be saved.
O, no end is limited to damned souls.
Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?	
Or why is this immortal that thou hast?
Ah, Pythagoras' metempsychosis, were that true,
This soul should fly from me and I be changed
Their souls are soon dissolved in elements;
But mine must live still to be plagued in hell.
Curst be the parents that engendered me!
No, Faustus, curse thyself. Curse Lucifer,
That hath deprived thee of the joys of heaven.	
O, it strikes, it strikes! Now, body, turn to air,
Or Lucifer will bear thee quick to hell.
O soul, be changed into little waterdrops,
And fall into the ocean, ne'er be found!
My God, my God, look not so fierce on me!	
Adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!
Ugly hell, gape not. Come not, Lucifer!
I'll burn my books. Ah, Mephistopheles!
Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight, 
And burned is Apollo's laurel bough
That sometime grew within this learned man.
Faustus is gone. Regard his hellish fall,
Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise	
Only to wonder at unlawful things,
Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits
To practice more than heavenly power permits.	
