<DF16vs>
Not marching in the fields of Trasimene
Where Mars did mate the warlike Carthagens,
Nor sporting in the dalliance of love
In Courts of Kings where state is overturned,
Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds
Intends our Muse to vaunt his heavenly verse.
Only this, Gentles: we must now perform
The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad.
And now to patient judgments we appeal,
And speak for Faustus in his infancy.
Now is he born, of parents base of stock,
In Germany, within a Town called Rhodes.
At riper years to Wittenberg he went,
Whereas his kinsmen chiefly brought him up.
So much he profits in Divinity,
That shortly he was graced with Doctor's name,
Excelling all, and sweetly can dispute
In th' heavenly matters of Theology,
Till swoll'n with cunning of a self-conceit,
His waxen wings did mount above his reach,
And melting, heavens conspired his overthrow;
For, falling to a devilish exercise
And glutted now with learning's golden gifts,
He surfeits upon cursed Necromancy.
Nothing so sweet as Magic is to him,
Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss;
And this the man that in his study sits.
Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin
To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess.
Having commenced, be a Divine in show;
Yet level at the end of every Art,
And live and die in Aristotle's works.
Sweet Analytics, 'tis thou hast ravished me!
Bene disserere est finis Logicis.
Is to dispute well Logic's chiefest end?
Affords this Art no greater miracle?
Then read no more; thou hast attained that end.
A greater subject fitteth Faustus' wit!
Bid On-kai-me-on farewell; and Galen come.
Be a Physician, Faustus; heap up gold,
And be eternized for some wondrous cure.
Summum bonum medicinae sanitas.
The end of Physic is our body's health.
Why, Faustus, hast thou not attained that end?
Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,
Whereby whole Cities have escaped the plague,
And thousand desperate maladies been cured?
Yet art thou still but Faustus and a man.
Couldst thou make men to live eternally,
Or, being dead, raise them to life again,
Then this profession were to be esteemed.
Physic, farewell! where is Justinian?
Si una eademque res legatur duobus,
Alter rem, alter valorem rei, etc.
A petty case of paltry Legacies!
Exhereditari filium non potest pater nisi...
Such is the subject of the institute
And universal body of the law.
This study fits a Mercenary drudge
Who aims at nothing but external trash,
Too servile and illiberal for me.
When all is done, Divinity is best.
Jerome's Bible, Faustus, view it well:
The reward of sin is death. That's hard.
Ay, we must die an everlasting death.
What doctrine call you this? Che sera, sera:
What will be, shall be? Divinity, adieu!
These Metaphysics of Magicians
And Necromantic books are heavenly:
Lines, Circles, Letters, Characters.
Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.
O, what a world of profit and delight,
Of power, of honor, and omnipotence
Is promised to the Studious Artisan!
All things that move between the quiet Poles
Shall be at my command. Emperors and Kings
Are but obeyed in their several Provinces,
But his dominion that exceeds in this
Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man.
A sound Magician is a Demigod.
Here tire my brains to get a Deity! 
Wagner, commend me to my dearest friends,
The German Valdes and Cornelius;
Request them earnestly to visit me.
Their conference will be a greater help to me
Than all my labors, plod I ne'er so fast.
O Faustus, lay that damned book aside,
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul
And heap God's heavy wrath upon thy head.
Read, read the Scriptures. That is blasphemy.
Go forward, Faustus, in that famous Art
Wherein all nature's treasure is contained.
Be thou on earth as jove is in the sky,
Lord and Commander of these elements. 
How am I glutted with conceit of this!
Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please?
Resolve me of all ambiguities?
Perform what desperate enterprise I will?
I'll have them fly to India for gold,
Ransack the Ocean for Orient Pearl,
And search all corners of the new-found world
For pleasant fruits and Princely delicates.
I'll have them read me strange Philosophy
And tell the secrets of all foreign Kings;
I'll have them wall all Germany with Brass
And make swift Rhine circle fair Wittenberg.
I'll have them fill the public Schools with silk,
Wherewith the Students shall be bravely clad
I'll levy soldiers with the coin they bring
And chase the Prince of Parma from our land
And reign sole King of all the Provinces.
Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war
Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp bridge
I'll make my servile spirits to invent.
Come, German Valdes and Cornelius,
And make me blest with your sage conference!
Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,
Know that your words have won me at the last
To practice Magic and concealed Arts;
Philosophy is odious and obscure;
Both law and Physic are for petty wits;
'tis magic, magic, that hath ravished me.
Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt,
And I, that have with subtle Syllogisms
Gravelled the Pastors of the German Church,
And made the flowering pride of Wittenberg
Swarm to my Problems, as th' infernal spirits
On sweet Musaeus when he came to hell,
Will be as cunning as Agrippa was,
Whose shadow made all Europe honor him.
Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience
Shall make all Nations to Canonize us.
As Indian Moors obey their Spanish Lords,
So shall the spirits of every element
Be always serviceable to us three.
Like lions shall they guard us when we please,
Like Almain Rutters with their horsemen's staves
Or Lapland Giants trotting by our sides,
Sometimes like women or unwedded Maids,
Shadowing more beauty in their Airy brows
Than have the white breasts of the Queen of love.
From Venice shall they drag huge Argosies,
And from America the Golden fleece
That yearly stuffed old Philip's treasury.
If learned Faustus will be resolute.
Valdes, as resolute am I in this
As thou to live: therefore object it not.
The miracles that magic will perform
Will make thee vow to study nothing else.
He that is grounded in Astrology,
Enriched with tongues, well seen in Minerals,
Hath all the Principles Magic doth require.
Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowned
And more frequented for this mystery
Than heretofore the Delphian Oracle.
The spirits tell me they can dry the sea
And fetch the treasure of all foreign wracks,
Yea, all the wealth that our forefathers hid
Within the massy entrails of the earth.
Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?
Nothing, Cornelius. O, this cheers my soul!
Come, show me some demonstrations Magical,
That I may conjure in some bushy Grove
And have these joys in full possession.
Then haste thee to some solitary Grove,
And bear wise Bacon's and Albanus' works,
The Hebrew Psalter, and new Testament;
And whatsoever else is requisite
We will inform thee ere our conference cease.
Valdes, first let him know the words of Art,
And then, all other ceremonies learned,
Faustus may try his cunning by himself.
First I'll instruct thee in the rudiments,
And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.
Then come and dine with me, and after meat
We'll canvass every quiddity thereof,
For ere I sleep I'll try what I can do.
This night I'll conjure, though I die therefore.
That follows not by force of argument,
Which you, being licentiates, should stand upon;
Therefore acknowledge your error and be attentive.
That thou art fallen into that damned Art 
for which they two are infamous through the world.
Were he a stranger, not allied to me,
The danger of his soul would make me mourn.
But come, let us go and inform the Rector.
It may be his grave counsel may reclaim him.
I fear me nothing will reclaim him now.
Yet let us see what we can do.} 
Now that the gloomy shadow of the night,
Longing to view Orion's drizzling look,
Leaps from th' Antarctic world unto the sky
And dims the Welkin with her pitchy breath,
Faustus begin thine Incantations,
And try if devils will obey thy Hest,
Seeing thou hast prayed and sacrificed to them.
Within this circle is Jehovah's Name,
Forward and backward Anagrammatized,
Th' abbreviated names of holy Saints,
Figures of every adjunct to the heavens,
And Characters of Signs and erring Stars,
By which the spirits are enforced to rise.
Then fear not, Faustus, to be resolute,
And try the utmost Magic can perform. 
I charge thee to return and change thy shape;
Thou art too ugly to attend on me.
Go, and return an old Franciscan Friar;
That holy shape becomes a devil best. 
I see there's virtue in my heavenly words.
Who would not be proficient in this Art?
How pliant is this Mephistophilis,
Full of obedience and humility.
Such is the force of Magic and my spells.
Now Faustus, what wouldst thou have me do?
I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
To do whatever Faustus shall command,
Be it to make the Moon drop from her Sphere
Or the Ocean to overwhelm the world.
I am a servant to great Lucifer
And may not follow thee without his leave.
No more than he commands must we perform.
Did not he charge thee to appear to me?
No, I came now hither of mine own accord.
Did not my conjuring raise thee? speak.
That was the cause, but yet per accidens,
For when we hear one rack the name of God,
Abjure the Scriptures and his Savior Christ,
We fly in hope to get his glorious soul;
Nor will we come unless he use such means
Whereby he is in danger to be damned.
Therefore the shortest cut for conjuring
Is stoutly to abjure all godliness
And pray devoutly to the Prince of Hell.
There is no chief but only Beelzebub,
To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.
This word 'Damnation' terrifies not me,
For I confound hell in Elysium.
My Ghost be with the old Philosophers!
But leaving these vain trifles of men's souls,
Tell me what is that Lucifer, thy Lord?
Arch regent and Commander of all Spirits.
Was not that Lucifer an Angel once?
Yes, Faustus, and most dearly loved of God.
How comes it then that he is Prince of Devils?
O, by aspiring pride and insolence,
For which God threw him from the face of heaven.
And what are you that live with Lucifer?
Unhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer,
Conspired against our God with Lucifer,
And are forever damned with Lucifer.
How comes it then that thou art out of hell?
Why this is hell, nor am I out of it.
Think'st thou that I that saw the face of God
And tasted the eternal Joys of heaven
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells
In being deprived of everlasting bliss?
O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands
Which strike a terror to my fainting soul.
What, is great Mephistophilis so passionate
For being deprived of the Joys of heaven?
Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,
And scorn those Joys thou never shalt possess.
Go bear these tidings to great Lucifer:
Seeing Faustus hath incurred eternal death
By desperate thoughts against Jove's Deity,
Say he surrenders up to him his soul,
So he will spare him four and twenty years,
Letting him live in all voluptuousness,
Having thee ever to attend on me,
To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
To tell me whatsoever I demand,
To slay mine enemies, and aid my friends,
And always be obedient to my will.
Go, and return to mighty Lucifer,
And meet me in my Study at Midnight,
And then resolve me of thy Master's mind.
Had I as many souls as there be Stars,
I'd give them all for Mephistophilis.
By him I'll be great Emperor of the world,
And make a bridge through the moving Air,
To pass the Ocean with a band of men.
I'll join the Hills that bind the Afric shore,
And make that Country continent to Spain,
And both contributory to my Crown.
The Emperor shall not live but by my leave,
Nor any Potentate of Germany.
Now that I have obtained what I desired,
I'll live in speculation of this Art
Till Mephistophilis return again. 
Now Faustus, must thou needs be damned?
What boots it then to think on God or Heaven?
Away with such vain fancies, and despair;
Despair in God, and trust in Beelzebub.
Now go not backward, Faustus, be resolute.
Why waverest thou? O, something soundeth in mine ear:
'Abjure this Magic; turn to God again.'
Wherein is fixed the love of Beelzebub.
To him I'll build an altar and a Church,
And offer lukewarm blood of newborn babes.
Go forward, Faustus, in that famous Art.
Sweet Faustus, leave that execrable Art.
Contrition, Prayer, Repentance? what of these?
O, they are means to bring thee unto heaven.
Rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,
That make them foolish that do use them most.
Sweet Faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.
No, Faustus, think of honor and of wealth.
Wealth? Why, the Signory of Emden shall be mine.
When Mephistophilis shall stand by me,
What power can hurt me? Faustus, thou art safe.
Cast no more doubts. Mephistophilis, come
And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer.
Is't not midnight? come, Mephistophilis.
Veni, veni Mephistophile! 
Now tell me what saith Lucifer, thy Lord?
That I shall wait on Faustus while he lives,
So he will buy my service with his soul.
Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee.
But now thou must bequeath it solemnly
And write a Deed of Gift with thine own blood,
For that security craves Lucifer.
If thou deny it, I must back to hell.
Stay, Mephistophilis, and tell me
What good will my soul do thy Lord.
Is that the reason why he tempts us thus?
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
Why, have you any pains that torture others?
As great as have the human souls of men.
But, tell me, Faustus, shall I have thy soul?
And I will be thy slave, and wait on thee
And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.
Ay, Mephistophilis, I'll give it him.
Then, Faustus, stab thy Arm courageously,
And bind thy soul that at some certain day
Great Lucifer may claim it as his own.
And then be thou as great as Lucifer.
Lo, Mephistophilis, for love of thee, 
Faustus hath cut his Arm, and with his proper 
Blood assures his soul to be great Lucifer's.
Chief Lord and Regent of perpetual night.
View here this blood that trickles from mine arm.
And let it be propitious for my wish.
Write it in manner of a Deed of Gift.
Ay, so I do. But Mephistophilis,
My blood congeals, and I can write no more.
I'll fetch thee fire to dissolve it straight.
What might the staying of my blood portend?
Is it unwilling I should write this bill?
Why streams it not that I may write afresh?
'Faustus gives to thee his soul.' O, there it stayed.
Why shouldst thou not? is not thy soul thine own?
Then write again: 'Faustus gives to thee his soul.'
See, Faustus, here is fire. Set it on.
So. Now the blood begins to clear again.
Now will I make an end immediately.
What will not I do to obtain his soul?
Consummatum est; this bill is ended,
And Faustus hath bequeathed his soul to Lucifer.
But what is this inscription on mine Arm?
Homo fuge! whither should I fly?
If unto god, he'll throw me down to hell.
My senses are deceived; here's nothing writ.
O yes, I see it plain. Even here is writ:
'Homo fuge!' yet shall not Faustus fly.
I'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.
What means this show? speak Mephistophilis.
Nothing, Faustus, but to delight thy mind
And let thee see what Magic can perform.
But may I raise up such spirits when I please?
Ay, Faustus, and do greater things than these.
Then, Mephistophilis, receive this scroll,
A Deed of Gift of body and of soul,
But yet conditionally that thou perform
All Covenants and Articles between us both.
Faustus, I swear by Hell and Lucifer
To effect all promises between us both.
Then hear me read it, Mephistophilis.
On these conditions following:
Ay, so are all things else; but whereabouts?
Within the bowels of these Elements,
Where we are tortured and remain forever.
Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscribed
In one self place, for where we are is hell,
And where hell is, there must we ever be.
And, to be short, when all the world dissolves
And every creature shall be purified,
All places shall be hell that is not heaven.
Ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.
Why, dost thou think that Faustus shall be damned?
Ay, of necessity, for here's the scroll
In which thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.
Ay, and body too. But what of that?
Think'st thou that Faustus is so fond to imagine
That after this life there is any pain?
No, these are trifles and mere old wives' Tales.
But I am an instance to prove the contrary,
For I tell thee I am damned and now in hell.
Here's a hot whore indeed! no, I'll no wife.
Marriage is but a ceremonial toy,
And if thou lovest me, think no more of it.
I'll cull thee out the fairest Courtezans
And bring them every morning to thy bed.
She whom thine eye shall like, thy heart shall have,
Were she as chaste as was Penelope,
As wise as Saba, or as beautiful
As was bright Lucifer before his fall.
Here, take this book and peruse it well.
The Iterating of these lines brings gold;
The framing of this circle on the ground
Brings Thunder, Whirlwinds, Storm and Lightning.
Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,
And men in harness shall appear to thee,
Ready to execute what thou command'st.
Thanks, Mephistophilis, for this sweet book.
This will I keep as chary as my life. 
When I behold the heavens, then I repent
And curse thee, wicked Mephistophilis,
Because thou hast deprived me of those Joys.
'Twas thine own seeking, Faustus, thank thyself.
But think'st thou heaven is such a glorious thing?
I tell thee, Faustus, it is not half so fair
As thou, or any man that breathes on earth.
'twas made for man; then he's more excellent.
If heaven was made for man, 'twas made for me.
I will renounce this Magic and repent.
Faustus, repent; yet God will pity thee.
Thou art a spirit; God cannot pity thee.
Who buzzeth in mine ears I am a spirit?
Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;
Yea, God will pity me if I repent.
Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.
My heart is hardened; I cannot repent.
Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven.
Swords, poison, guns, halters, and envenomed steel
Are laid before me to dispatch myself;
And long ere this I should have done the deed,
Had not sweet pleasure conquered deep despair.
Have not I made blind Homer sing to me
Of Alexander's love and Oenon's death?
And hath not he, that built the walls of Thebes
With ravishing sound of his melodious Harp,
Made music with my Mephistophilis?
Why should I die then, or basely despair?
I am resolved; Faustus shall not repent.
Come, Mephistophilis, let us dispute again
And reason of divine Astrology.
Speak; are there many Spheres above the Moon?
Are all Celestial bodies but one Globe,
As is the substance of this centric earth?
As are the elements, such are the heavens,
Even from the Moon unto the Empyreal Orb,
Mutually folded in each others' Spheres,
And jointly move upon one Axletree,
Whose termine is termed the world's wide Pole;
Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter
These slender questions Wagner can decide.
Hath Mephistophilis no greater skill?
Who knows not the double motion of the Planets?
That the first is finished in a natural day;
The second thus: Saturn in thirty years;
Never too late, if Faustus will repent.
If thou repent, devils will tear thee in pieces.
Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.
O Christ, my Savior, my Savior,
Help to save distressed Faustus' soul.
Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just.
There's none but I have interest in the same.
O, what art thou that look'st so terribly?
I am Lucifer, and this is my companion Prince
O, Faustus, they are come to fetch thy soul.
We come to tell thee thou dost injure us.
Thou call'st on Christ, contrary to thy promise.
Thou shouldst not think on God.
Think on the devil. And his dam too.
Nor will Faustus henceforth. pardon him for this,
And Faustus vows never to look to heaven.
So shalt thou show thyself an obedient servant,
And we will highly gratify thee for it.
Learned Faustus, to find the secrets of Astronomy,
Graven in the book of Jove's high firmament,
Did mount him up to scale Olympus' top,
Where, sitting in a Chariot burning bright
Drawn by the strength of yoked Dragons' necks,
He views the clouds, the Planets, and the Stars,
The Tropics, Zones, and quarters of the sky,
From the bright circle of the horned Moon
Even to the height of Primum Mobile.
And whirling round with this circumference,
Within the concave compass of the Pole,
From East to West his Dragons swiftly glide
And in eight days did bring him home again.
Not long he stayed within his quiet house
To rest his bones after his weary toil,
But new exploits do hale him out again,
And mounted then upon a Dragon's back,
That with his wings did part the subtle air,
He now is gone to prove Cosmography,
That measures coasts and kingdoms of the earth,
And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome
To see the Pope and manner of his Court
And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
The which this day is highly solemnized. 
Having now, my good Mephistophilis,
Passed with delight the stately Town of Trier,
Environed round with airy mountaintops,
With walls of Flint, and deep entrenched Lakes,
Not to be won by any conquering Prince;
From Paris next, coasting the realm of France,
We saw the River Maine fall into Rhine,
Whose banks are set with Groves of fruitful Vines;
Then up to Naples, rich Campania,
Whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,
The streets straight forth and paved with finest brick,
There saw we learned Maro's golden tomb,
The way he cut, an English mile in length,
Through a rock of stone in one night's space.
From thence to Venice, Padua, and the East,
In one of which a sumptuous Temple stands,
That threats the stars with her aspiring top,
Whose frame is paved with sundry colored stones,
And roofed aloft with curious work in gold.
Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time.
But tell me now what resting place is this?
Hast thou, as erst I did command,
Conducted me within the walls of Rome?
I have, my Faustus, and for proof thereof
This is the goodly Palace of the Pope;
And 'cause we are no common guests,
I choose his privy chamber for our use.
I hope his Holiness will bid us welcome.
All's one, for we'll be bold with his Venison.
But now, my Faustus, that thou mayst perceive
What rome contains for to delight thine eyes,
Know that this City stands upon seven hills
That underprop the groundwork of the same.
Just through the midst runs flowing Tiber's stream,
With winding banks that cut it in two parts,
Over the which four stately Bridges lean,
That make safe passage to each part of Rome.
Upon the Bridge called Ponte Angelo
Erected is a Castle passing strong,
Where thou shalt see such store of Ordinance,
As that the double Cannons, forged of brass,
Do match the number of the days contained
Within the compass of one complete year;
Besides the gates and high Pyramides
That Julius Caesar brought from Africa.
Now, by the kingdoms of Infernal Rule,
Of Styx, of Acheron, and the fiery Lake
Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear
That I do long to see the Monuments
And situation of bright resplendent Rome.
Come, therefore, let's away.
Nay, stay, my Faustus. I know you'd see the Pope
And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
The which, this day with high solemnity,
This day is held through Rome and Italy
In honor of the Pope's triumphant victory.
Sweet Mephistophilis, thou pleasest me.
Whilst I am here on earth, Let me be cloyed
With all things that delight the heart of man.
My four and twenty years of liberty
I'll spend in pleasure and in dalliance,
That Faustus' name, whilst this bright frame doth stand,
May be admired through the furthest land.
'Tis well said, Faustus. Come then, stand by me
And thou shalt see them come immediately.
Nay, stay, my gentle Mephistophilis,
And grant me my request, and then I go.
Thou know'st within the compass of eight days
We viewed the face of heaven, of earth and hell.
So high our Dragons soared into the air,
That looking down, the earth appeared to me
No bigger than my hand in quantity.
There did we view the kingdoms of the world,
And what might please mine eye I there beheld.
Then in this show let me an Actor be,
That this proud Pope may Faustus' cunning see.
Let it be so, my Faustus. But, first stay
And view their triumphs as they pass this way.
And then devise what best contents thy mind
By cunning in thine Art to cross the Pope
Or dash the pride of this solemnity,
To make his Monks and Abbots stand like Apes
And point like Antics at his triple Crown,
To beat the beads about the Friars' Pates
Or clap huge horns upon the Cardinals' heads,
Or any villainy thou canst devise,
And I'll perform it, Faustus. Hark, they come.
This day shall make thee be admired in Rome.
Cast down our Footstool. Saxon Bruno, stoop,
Whilst on thy back his holiness ascends
Saint Peter's Chair and State Pontifical.
Proud Lucifer, that State belongs to me,
But thus I fall to Peter, not to thee.
To me and Peter shalt thou grovelling lie
And crouch before the Papal dignity.
Sound Trumpets then, for thus Saint Peter's Heir
From bruno's back ascends Saint Peter's Chair.
Thus, as the Gods creep on with feet of wool
Long ere with Iron hands they punish men,
So shall our sleeping vengeance now arise
And smite with death thy hated enterprise.
Lord Cardinals of France and Padua,
Go forthwith to our holy Consistory,
And read amongst the Statutes Decretal
What, by the holy Council held at Trent,
The sacred Synod hath decreed for him
That doth assume the Papal government
Without election and a true consent.
Away, and bring us word with speed.
Go, haste thee, gentle Mephistophilis,
Follow the Cardinals to the Consistory,
And as they turn their superstitious Books,
Strike them with sloth and drowsy idleness,
And make them sleep so sound that in their shapes
Thyself and I may parley with this Pope,
This proud confronter of the Emperor,
And in despite of all his Holiness
Restore this Bruno to his liberty
And bear him to the States of Germany.
Faustus, I go. Dispatch it soon.
The Pope shall curse that Faustus came to rome.
Pope Adrian, let me have right of Law.
I was elected by the Emperor.
We will depose the Emperor for that deed
And curse the people that submit to him.
Both he and thou shalt stand excommunicate
And interdict from Church's privilege
And all society of holy men.
He grows too proud in his authority,
Lifting his lofty head above the clouds,
And like a Steeple overpeers the Church.
But we'll pull down his haughty insolence,
And as Pope Alexander, our Progenitor,
Trod on the neck of German Frederick,
Adding this golden sentence to our praise:
'That Peter's heirs should tread on Emperors
And walk upon the dreadful Adder's back,
Treading the Lion and the Dragon down
And fearless spurn the killing Basilisk,'
So will we quell that haughty Schismatic,
And by authority Apostolical
Depose him from his Regal Government.
Pope Julius swore to Princely Sigismund,
For him and the succeeding Popes of Rome,
To hold the Emperors their lawful Lords.
Pope Julius did abuse the Church's Rites,
And therefore none of his Decrees can stand.
Is not all power on earth bestowed on us?
And therefore, though we would, we cannot err.
Behold this Silver Belt, whereto is fixed
Seven golden keys fast sealed with seven seals
In token of our sevenfold power from heaven,
To bind or loose, lock fast, condemn or judge,
Resign, or seal, or whatso pleaseth us.
Then he and thou and all the world shall stoop,
Or be assured of our dreadful curse
To light as heavy as the pains of hell.
Now tell me, Faustus, are we not fitted well?
Yes, Mephistophilis, and two such Cardinals
Ne'er served a holy Pope as we shall do.
But whilst they sleep within the Consistory,
Let us salute his reverend Fatherhood.
Behold, my Lord, the Cardinals are returned.
Welcome, grave Fathers. Answer presently:
What have our holy Council there decreed
Concerning Bruno and the Emperor,
In quittance of their late conspiracy
Against our State and Papal dignity?
Most sacred Patron of the Church of rome,
By full consent of all the Synod
Of Priests and Prelates it is thus decreed:
That Bruno and the German Emperor
Be held as Lollards and bold Schismatics
And proud disturbers of the Church's peace.
And if that Bruno by his own assent,
Without enforcement of the German Peers,
Did seek to wear the triple Diadem
And by your death to climb Saint Peter's Chair,
The statutes Decretal have thus decreed:
He shall be straight condemned of heresy
And on a pile of Fagots burned to death.
It is enough. Here, take him to your charge,
And bear him straight to Ponte Angelo,
And in the strongest Tower enclose him fast.
Tomorrow, sitting in our Consistory
With all our College of grave Cardinals,
We will determine of his life or death.
Here, take his triple Crown along with you,
And leave it in the Church's treasury.
Make haste again, my good Lord Cardinals,
And take our blessing Apostolical.
So, so. Was never Devil thus blest before.
Away, sweet Mephistophilis, be gone.
The Cardinals will be plagued for this anon.
Go presently and bring a banquet forth,
That we may solemnize Saint Peter's feast,
And with Lord Raymond, king of Hungary,
Drink to our late and happy victory. 
Now, Faustus, come, prepare thyself for mirth.
The sleepy Cardinals are hard at hand
To censure Bruno, that is posted hence,
And on a proud-paced Steed, as swift as thought,
Flies o'er the Alps to fruitful Germany,
There to salute the woeful Emperor.
The Pope will curse them for their sloth today,
That slept both Bruno and his crown away.
But now, that Faustus may delight his mind
And by their folly make some merriment,
Sweet Mephistophilis, so charm me here
That I may walk invisible to all
And do whate'er I please unseen of any.
Faustus, thou shalt. then kneel down presently:
Whilst on thy head I lay my hand
And charm thee with this Magic wand,
First wear this girdle; then appear
The Planets seven, the gloomy air,
Hell and the Furies' forked hair,
Pluto's blue fire, and Hecate's tree.
With Magic spells so compass thee
That no eye may thy body see.
So Faustus. Now for all their holiness,
Do what thou wilt, thou shalt not be discerned.
Thanks, Mephistophilis. now Friars take heed
Lest Faustus make your shaven crowns to bleed.
Faustus, no more. See where the Cardinals come.
Welcome, Lord Cardinals. Come, sit down.
Lord Raymond, take your seat. Friars attend,
And see that all things be in readiness,
As best beseems this solemn festival.
First, may it please your sacred Holiness
To view the sentence of the reverend Synod
Concerning Bruno and the Emperor?
What needs this question? Did I not tell you
Tomorrow we would sit I' the Consistory
And there determine of his punishment?
You brought us word even now; it was decreed
That Bruno and the cursed Emperor
Were by the holy Council both condemned
For loathed lollards and base Schismatics.
Then wherefore would you have me view that book?
Your Grace mistakes. you gave us no such charge.
Deny it not. We all are witnesses
That Bruno here was late delivered you,
With his rich triple crown to be reserved
And put into the Church's treasury.
Unless you bring them forth immediately.
Hale them to prison. Lade their limbs with gyves.
False Prelates, for this hateful treachery
Cursed be your souls to hellish misery.
So, they are safe. Now, Faustus, to the feast.
The Pope had never such a frolic guest.
Lord Archbishop of Rheims, sit down with us.
Fall to. The Devil choke you an you spare.
Who's that spoke? Friars look about.
Lord raymond, pray fall to. I am beholding
To the Bishop of Milan for this so rare a present.
What Lollards do attend our Holiness,
That we receive such great indignity?
My wine gone too? ye Lubbers, look about
And find the man that doth this villainy,
Or by our sanctitude, you all shall die.
Please it your holiness, I think it be
some Ghost crept out of Purgatory, and now
is come unto your holiness for his pardon.
Go then, command our Priests to sing a Dirge
To lay the fury of this same troublesome ghost.
How now? must every bit be spiced with 
O come and help to bear my body hence.
Damned be this soul forever for this deed.
You Princely Legions of infernal Rule,
How am I vexed by these villains' Charms!
From Constantinople have they brought me now,
Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.
To purge the rashness of this cursed deed,
First be thou turned to this ugly shape,
For Apish deeds transformed to an ape.
And so thou shalt. be thou transformed to a dog,
and carry him upon thy back. away, be gone!
Now with the flames of ever-burning fire,
I'll wing myself and forthwith fly amain
Unto my Faustus, to the great Turk's Court. 
What ho, Officers, Gentlemen,
Hie to the presence to attend the Emperor.
Good Frederick, see the rooms be voided straight;
His Majesty is coming to the Hall.
Go back, and see the State in readiness.
But where is Bruno, our elected Pope,
That on a fury's back came post from Rome?
Will not his grace consort the Emperor?
O yes, and with him comes the German Conjuror,
The learned Faustus, fame of Wittenberg,
The wonder of the world for Magic Art;
And he intends to show great Carolus
The race of all his stout progenitors,
And bring in presence of his Majesty
The royal shapes and warlike semblances
Of Alexander and his beauteous Paramour.
Where is Benvolio? Fast asleep, I warrant you,
He took his rouse with stoups of rhenish wine
So kindly yesternight to Bruno's health
That all this day the sluggard keeps his bed.
See, see, his window's ope. We'll call to him.
For Faustus at the Court is late arrived,
And at his heels a thousand furies wait
To accomplish whatsoever the Doctor please.
Come, leave thy chamber first, and thou shalt see
This Conjuror perform such rare exploits
Before the Pope and royal Emperor
As never yet was seen in Germany.
Has not the Pope enough of conjuring yet?
He was upon the devil's back late enough,
And if he be so far in love with him,
I would he would post with him to Rome again.
Speak, wilt thou come and see this sport? Not I.
Wilt thou stand in thy Window, and see it then?
Ay, and I fall not asleep I' the meantime.
The Emperor is at hand, who comes to see
What wonders by black spells may compassed be.
Wonder of men, renowned Magician,
Thrice learned Faustus, welcome to our Court.
This deed of thine, in setting Bruno free
From his and our professed enemy,
Shall add more excellence unto thine Art
Than if by powerful Necromantic spells
Thou couldst command the world's obedience.
Forever be beloved of Carolus,
And if this Bruno thou hast late redeemed
In peace possess the triple Diadem
And sit in Peter's Chair despite of chance,
Thou shalt be famous through all Italy
And honored of the German Emperor.
These gracious words, most royal Carolus,
Shall make poor Faustus to his utmost power
Both love and serve the German Emperor
And lay his life at holy Bruno's feet.
For proof whereof, if so your Grace be pleased,
The Doctor stands prepared by power of Art
To cast his Magic charms that shall pierce through
The Ebon gates of ever-burning hell,
And hale the stubborn furies from their caves
To compass whatsoe'er your grace commands.
Then, Faustus, as thou late didst promise us,
We would behold that famous Conqueror,
Great Alexander and his Paramour
In their true shapes and state Majestical,
That we may wonder at their excellence.
Your Majesty shall see them presently.
And with a solemn noise of trumpets' sound
Present before this royal Emperor,
Great Alexander and his beauteous Paramour.
My gracious Lord, you do forget yourself,
These are but shadows, not substantial.
O pardon me. My thoughts are so ravished
With sight of this renowned Emperor,
That in mine arms I would have compassed him.
But, Faustus, since I may not speak to them,
To satisfy my longing thoughts at full,
Let me this tell thee: I have heard it said
That this fair Lady, whilst she lived on earth,
Had on her neck a little wart or mole;
How may I prove that saying to be true?
Your Majesty may boldly go and see.
And in this sight thou better pleasest me
Than if I gained another Monarchy.
A plague upon you! let me sleep a while.
Look up, Benvolio, 'tis the Emperor calls.
The Emperor? where? O zounds, my head!
O say not so, sir. the Doctor has no skill,
No Art, no cunning, to present these Lords
Or bring before this royal Emperor
The mighty Monarch, warlike Alexander.
If Faustus do it, you are straight resolved
In bold Actaeon's shape to turn a Stag.
And therefore, my Lord, so please your Majesty,
I'll raise a kennel of Hounds shall hunt him so
As all his footmanship shall scarce prevail
To keep his Carcass from their bloody fangs.
Ho, Belimoth, Argiron, Asteroth!
Then, good Master Doctor,
Let me entreat you to remove his horns.
He has done penance now sufficiently.
Come, Faustus. while the Emperor lives,
In recompense of this thy high desert,
Thou shalt command the state of Germany
And live beloved of mighty Carolus. 
Nay, sweet Benvolio, let us sway thy thoughts
From this attempt against the Conjurer.
Away! you love me not to urge me thus.
Shall I let slip so great an injury,
When every servile groom jests at my wrongs
And in their rustic gambols proudly say,
'Benvolio's head was graced with horns today'?
O, may these eyelids never close again
Till with my sword I have that Conjurer slain.
If you will aid me in this enterprise,
Then draw your weapons and be resolute.
If not, depart. here will Benvolio die,
But Faustus' death shall quit my infamy.
Nay, we will stay with thee, betide what may,
And kill that Doctor if he come this way.
Then, gentle Frederick, hie thee to the grove,
And place our servants and our followers
close in an ambush there behind the trees.
By this (I know) the Conjurer is near.
I saw him kneel and kiss the Emperor's hand
And take his leave, laden with rich rewards.
Then, Soldiers, boldly fight. If Faustus die,
Take you the wealth; leave us the victory.
Come, soldiers. Follow me unto the grove.
Who kills him shall have gold and endless love.
My head is lighter than it was by th' horns,
But yet my heart's more ponderous than my head
And pants until I see that conjurer dead.
Where shall we place ourselves, Benvolio?
Here will we stay to bide the first assault.
O, were that damned Hellhound but in place,
Thou soon shouldst see me quit my foul disgrace.
Close, close, the Conjurer is at hand
And all alone comes walking in his gown.
Be ready then, and strike the Peasant down.
Mine be that honor then. now, sword, strike home.
For horns he gave I'll have his head anon.
See, see, he comes. No words! this blow ends all.
Hell take his soul; his body thus must fall.
Break may his heart with groans! dear Frederick, see, 
Thus will I end his griefs immediately.
Strike with a willing hand. his head is off.
The Devil's dead, the Furies now may laugh.
Was this that stern aspect, that awful frown,
Made the grim monarch of infernal spirits
Tremble and quake at his commanding charms?
Was this that damned head whose art conspired
Benvolio's shame before the emperor?
Ay, that's the head, and here the body lies,
Justly rewarded for his villainies.
Come, let's devise how we may add more shame
To the black scandal of his hated name.
First, on his head, in quittance of my wrongs,
I'll nail huge forked horns and let them hang
Within the window where he yoked me first,
That all the world may see my just revenge.
Nay, keep it. Faustus will have heads and hands,
Ay, all your hearts, to recompense this deed.
Knew you not, Traitors, I was limited
For four and twenty years to breathe on earth?
And had you cut my body with your swords,
Or hewed this flesh and bones as small as sand,
Yet in a minute had my spirit returned,
And I had breathed a man made free from harm.
But wherefore do I dally my revenge?
Asteroth, Belimoth, Mephistophilis!
Go, horse these traitors on your fiery backs,
And mount aloft with them as high as heaven;
Thence pitch them headlong to the lowest hell.
Yet stay. the world shall see their misery,
And hell shall after plague their treachery.
Go, Belimoth, and take this caitiff hence,
And hurl him in some lake of mud and dirt.
Take thou this other; drag him through the woods
Amongst the pricking thorns and sharpest briers,
Whilst with my gentle Mephistophilis
This Traitor flies unto some steepy rock
That, rolling down, may break the villain's bones
As he intended to dismember me.
Fly hence. dispatch my charge immediately.
Pity us, gentle Faustus. save our lives.
Away! He must needs go that the devil Drives.
Come, sirs, prepare yourselves in readiness.
Make haste to help these noble Gentlemen;
I heard them parley with the Conjurer.
See where he comes. dispatch and kill the Slave.
What's here? an ambush to betray my life?
Then, Faustus, try thy skill. base peasants, stand,
For lo, these Trees remove at my command
And stand as Bulwarks 'twixt yourselves and me,
To shield me from your hated treachery.
Yet to encounter this your weak attempt,
Behold an Army comes incontinent.
Half smothered in a lake of mud and dirt,
Through which the Furies dragged me by the heels.
Martino, see! Benvolio's horns again.
O misery! how now, Benvolio?
Defend me, heaven. shall I be haunted still?
Nay, fear not man; we have no power to kill.
My friends transformed thus! O hellish spite!
Your heads are all set with horns. You hit it right.
It is your own you mean. feel on your head.
Nay, chafe not man. we all are sped.
What devil attends this damned Magician,
That, spite of spite, our wrongs are doubled?
What may we do, that we may hide our shames?
If we should follow him to work revenge,
He'd join long Asses' ears to these huge horns,
And make us laughingstocks to all the world.
What shall we then do, dear Benvolio?
I have a Castle joining near these woods,
And thither we'll repair and live obscure
Till time shall alter these our brutish shapes.
Sith black disgrace hath thus eclipsed our fame,
We'll rather die with grief than live with shame.
What art thou, Faustus, but a man condemned to die?
Thy fatal time draws to a final end.
Despair doth drive distrust into my thoughts.
Confound these passions with a quiet sleep.
Tush! Christ did call the Thief upon the Cross;
Then rest thee, Faustus, quiet in conceit.
This makes me wonder more than all the rest,
that at this time of the year, when every tree
What rude disturbers have we at the gate?
Go, pacify their fury. set it ope,
And then demand of them what they would have.
Why, how now, Masters, what a coil is there?
What is the reason you disturb the Duke?
We have no reason for it; therefore a fig for him.
Why, saucy varlets, dare you be so bold?
'Faith you are too outrageous, but come near;
I have procured your pardons.  welcome all!
Nay, hark you; can you tell me where you are?
Ay, marry can I: we are under heaven.
Ay, but sir saucebox, know you in what place?
Ay, ay, the house is good enough to drink in.
Be not so furious. come, you shall have Beer.
My lord, beseech you give me leave a while:
I'll gage my credit, 'twill content your grace.
With all my heart, kind Doctor. please thyself;
Our servants and our Court's at thy command.
I humbly thank your grace. then fetch some Beer.
My wooden leg? what dost thou mean by that?
Ha, ha, ha! dost hear him, Dick? he has forgot his leg.
Ay, ay, he does not stand much upon that.
No, 'faith; not much upon a wooden leg.
Good Lord, that flesh and blood should be so frail
We are much beholding to this learned man.
So are we, Madam, which we will recompense
With all the love and kindness that we may.
His Artful sport drives all sad thoughts away.
I think my Master means to die shortly.
he has made his will, and given me his wealth,
his house, his goods, and store of golden plate,
besides two thousand ducats ready coined.
I wonder what he means. if death were nigh,
he would not frolic thus. he's now at supper
with the scholars, where there's such bellycheer
as Wagner in his life ne'er saw the like. and see
where they come; belike the feast is done.
For that I know your friendship is unfeigned,
It is not Faustus' custom to deny
The just requests of those that wish him well,
You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece,
No otherwise for pomp or Majesty
Than when sir Paris crossed the seas with her
And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.
Be silent then, for danger is in words.
Was this fair Helen, whose admired worth
Made Greece with ten years' wars afflict poor Troy?
Too simple is my wit to tell her worth,
Whom all the world admires for majesty.
Now we have seen the pride of Nature's work
We'll take our leaves, and for this blessed sight
Happy and blest be Faustus evermore.
Gentlemen, farewell; the same wish I to you.
O gentle Faustus, leave this damned Art,
This Magic, that will charm thy soul to hell
And quite bereave thee of salvation.
Though thou hast now offended like a man,
Do not persever in it like a Devil.
Yet, yet, thou hast an amiable soul,
If sin by custom grow not into nature.
Then, Faustus, will repentance come too late;
Then thou art banished from the sight of heaven.
No mortal can express the pains of hell.
It may be this my exhortation
Seems harsh and all unpleasant; let it not,
For, gentle son, I speak it not in wrath
Or envy of thee, but in tender love
And pity of thy future misery.
And so have hope that this my kind rebuke,
Checking thy body, may amend thy soul.
Where art thou, Faustus? wretch, what hast thou done?
Hell claims his right, and with a roaring voice
Says, 'Faustus, come; thine hour is almost come;'
And Faustus now will come to do thee right.
O stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps.
I see an Angel hover o'er thy head,
And with a vial full of precious grace
Offer to pour the same into thy soul.
Then call for mercy and avoid despair.
Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.
Faustus, I leave thee, but with grief of heart,
Fearing the enemy of thy hapless soul. 
Accursed Faustus, wretch, what hast thou done?
I do repent, and yet I do despair.
Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast.
What shall I do to shun the snares of death?
Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul
For disobedience to my sovereign Lord.
Revolt, or I'll in piecemeal tear thy flesh.
I do repent I e'er offended him.
Sweet Mephistophilis, entreat thy Lord
To pardon my unjust presumption,
And with my blood again I will confirm
The former vow I made to Lucifer.
Do it, then, Faustus, with unfeigned heart,
Lest greater dangers do attend thy drift.
Torment, sweet friend, that base and aged man
That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,
With greatest torments that our hell affords.
His faith is great; I cannot touch his soul,
But what I may afflict his body with
I will attempt, which is but little worth.
One thing, good servant, let me crave of thee
To glut the longing of my heart's desire  -- 
That I might have unto my paramour
That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,
Whose sweet embraces may extinguish clear
Those thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,
And keep my vow I made to Lucifer.
This, or what else my Faustus shall desire,
Shall be performed in twinkling of an eye.
Was this the face that Launched a thousand ships
And burnt the topless Towers of Ilium?
Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
Her lips suck forth my soul: see, where it flies!
Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.
Here will I dwell, for heaven is in these lips,
And all is dross that is not Helena.
I will be Paris, and for love of thee
Instead of Troy shall Wittenberg be sacked;
And I will combat with weak Menelaus
And wear thy colors on my plumed crest.
Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel
And then return to Helen for a kiss.
O, thou art fairer than the evening's air,
Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars.
Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
When he appeared to hapless Semele,
More lovely than the Monarch of the sky
In wanton Arethusa's azure arms,
And none but thou shalt be my Paramour. 
Thus from infernal Dis do we ascend
To view the subjects of our Monarchy,
Those souls which sin seals, the black sons of hell,
'mong which as chief, Faustus, we come to thee,
Bringing with us lasting damnation
To wait upon thy soul. the time is come
Which makes it forfeit. And this gloomy night,
Here in this room will wretched Faustus be.
To mark him how he doth demean himself.
How should he, but in desperate lunacy?
Fond wordling, now his heartblood dries with grief;
His conscience kills it, and his laboring brain
Begets a world of idle fantasies
To overreach the Devil. but all in vain;
His store of pleasures must be sauced with pain.
He and his servant, Wagner, are at hand.
Both come from drawing Faustus' latest will.
O my dear Faustus, what imports this fear?
Is all our pleasure turned to melancholy?
He is not well with being over solitary.
If it be so, we'll have Physicians,
and Faustus shall be cured.
'Tis but a surfeit, sir; fear nothing.
Ay, Faustus, now thou hast no hope of heaven;
Therefore despair. think only upon hell,
For that must be thy mansion, there to dwell.
O thou bewitching fiend, 'twas thy temptation
Hath robbed me of eternal happiness.
I do confess it, Faustus, and rejoice.
'Twas I, that when thou wert i' the way to heaven,
Dammed up thy passage. when thou took'st the book
To view the Scriptures, then I turned the leaves
What, weep'st thou? 'tis too late. despair! Farewell!
Fools that will laugh on earth, must weep in hell.
O, Faustus, if thou hadst given ear to me,
Innumerable joys had followed thee;
But thou didst love the world. Gave ear to me,
And now must taste hell's pains perpetually.
O what will all thy riches, pleasures, pomps
Avail thee now? Nothing but vex thee more,
To want in hell, that had on earth such store.
O, thou hast lost celestial happiness,
Pleasures unspeakable, bliss without end.
Hadst thou affected sweet divinity,
Hell or the Devil had had no power on thee.
In what resplendent glory thou hadst sat
In yonder throne, like those bright shining Saints,
And triumphed over hell. that hast thou lost,
And now, poor soul, must thy good Angel leave thee.
The jaws of hell are open to receive thee. 
Now, Faustus, let thine eyes with horror stare
Into that vast perpetual torture house.
There are the Furies tossing damned souls
On burning forks; their bodies boil in lead.
There are live quarters broiling on the coals,
That ne'er can die. this ever-burning chair
Is for o'ertortured souls to rest them in.
These that are fed with sops of flaming fire
Were gluttons and loved only delicates
And laughed to see the poor starve at their gates.
But yet all these are nothing; thou shalt see
Ten thousand tortures that more horrid be.
O, I have seen enough to torture me.
Nay, thou must feel them, taste the smart of all.
He that loves pleasure must for pleasure fall.
And so I leave thee, Faustus, till anon;
Then wilt thou tumble in confusion. 
And then thou must be damned perpetually.
Stand still, you ever-moving Spheres of heaven,
That time may cease and midnight never come.
Fair nature's eye, rise, rise again, and make
Perpetual day; or let this hour be but
A year, a month, a week, a natural day,
That Faustus may repent and save his soul.
O lente, lente currite, noctis equi!
The stars move still; Time runs; the Clock will strike;
The devil will come, and Faustus must be damned.
O, I'll leap up to heaven! who pulls me down?
One drop of blood will save me. o, my Christ!
Rend not my heart for naming of my Christ!
Yet will I call on him. O, spare me, Lucifer!
And see a threat'ning Arm, an angry Brow.
Mountains and Hills, come, come, and fall on me,
And hide me from the heavy wrath of heaven,
No! Then will I headlong run into the earth.
Gape, earth! O no, it will not harbor me!
You Stars that reigned at my nativity,
Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,
Now draw up Faustus like a foggy mist
Into the entrails of yon laboring cloud,
That when you vomit forth into the air,
My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
But let my soul mount, and ascend to heaven.
O, half the hour is past; 'twill all be past anon.
O, if my soul must suffer for my sin,
Impose some end to my incessant pain.
Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
A hundred thousand, and at last be saved.
No end is limited to damned souls.
Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?
Or why is this immortal that thou hast?
O, Pythagoras' Metempsychosis, were that true,
This soul should fly from me, and I be changed
All beasts are happy, for, when they die
Their souls are soon dissolved in elements,
But mine must live still to be plagued in hell.
Cursed be the parents that engendered me!
No, Faustus, curse thyself, curse Lucifer
That hath deprived thee of the joys of heaven.
It strikes, it strikes! now, body, turn to air,
Or Lucifer will bear thee quick to hell.
O soul, be changed into small waterdrops,
And fall into the Ocean, ne'er be found!
O mercy, heaven, look not so fierce on me!
Adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!
Ugly hell, gape not! come not, Lucifer!
I'll burn my books! o, Mephistophilis... 
Come, gentlemen, let us go visit Faustus,
For such a dreadful night was never seen
Since first the world's creation did begin.
Such fearful shrieks and cries were never heard.
Pray heaven the Doctor have escaped the danger.
O help us, heaven! see, here are Faustus' limbs,
All torn asunder by the hand of death.
The devils whom Faustus served have torn him thus;
For 'twixt the hours of twelve and one, methought
I heard him shriek and call aloud for help,
At which self time the house seemed all on fire
With dreadful horror of these damned fiends.
Well, Gentlemen, though Faustus' end be such
As every Christian heart laments to think on,
Yet for he was a Scholar, once admired
For wondrous knowledge in our German schools,
We'll give his mangled limbs due burial;
And all the Students, clothed in mourning black,
Shall wait upon his heavy funeral. 
Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight.
And burned is Apollo's Laurel bough
That sometime grew within this learned man.
Faustus is gone. regard his hellish fall,
Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise
Only to wonder at unlawful things,
Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits
To practice more than heavenly power permits.
Terminat hora diem; Terminat Auctor opus.
