<GR5VS> ALPHVS>
poets are scarce, when goddesses themselves 
are forced to leave their high and stately seats, 
placed on the top of high olympus mount, 
to seek them out, to pen their champions' praise.
The time hath been when Homer's sugared muse,
did make each echo to repeat his verse, 
that every coward that durst crack a spear, 
and tilt and tourney for his ladies sake, 
was painted out in colors of such price 
as might become the proudest potentate.
But nowadays so irksome idleness slights,
and cursed charms have witched each student's mind,
that death it is to any of them all,
if that their hands to penning you do call: 
o virgil, virgil, were't thou now alive, 
whose painful pen, in stout augustus' days, 
did deign to let the base and silly fly 
to scape away without thy praise of her; 
I do not doubt but long or ere this time, 
Alphonsus' fame unto the heavens should climb: 
Alphonsus' fame, that man of love his seed, 
sprung from the loins of the immortal gods,
whose sire, although he habit on the earth, 
may claim a portion in the fiery pole, 
as well as any one what e'er he be.
But setting by Alphonsus' power divine, 
what man alive, or now amongst the ghosts, 
could countervail his courage and his strength?
But thou art dead, yea virgil, thou art gone:
and all his acts drowned in oblivion. 
No, Venus, no, though poets prove unkind,
and loath to stand in penning of his deeds, 
yet rather then they shall be clean forgot, 
I, which was wont to follow cupid's games, 
will put in ure minerva's sacred art; 
and this my hand, which used for to pen 
the praise of love, and cupid's peerless power, 
will now begin to treat of bloody mars,
of doughty deeds and valiant victories. 
But see whereas the stately muses come, 
whose harmony doth very far surpass 
the heavenly music of Apollo's pipe!
But what means this? Melpomene herself
with all her sisters sound their instruments,
only excepted fair calliope,
who, coming last and hanging down her head, 
doth plainly show by outward actions
what secret sorrow doth torment her heart.
calliope, thou which so oft didst crack 
how that such clients clustered to thy court, 
by thick and threefold, as not any one 
of all thy sisters might compare with thee; 
where be thy scholars now become, I trow?
Where are they vanished in such sudden sort, 
that while as we do play upon our strings,
you stand still lazing, and have nought to do?
melpomene, make you a why of that?
I know full oft you have in authors read, 
the higher tree, the sooner is the fall, 
and they which first do flourish and bear sway,
upon the sudden vanish clean away. 
mock on apace! My back is broad enough
to bear your flouts, as many as they be.
That year is rare, that ne'er feels winter's storms; 
that tree is fertile, which ne'er wanteth fruit; 
and that same muse hath heaped well in store, 
which never wanteth clients at her door. 
But yet, my sisters, when the surgent seas
have ebbed their fill, their waves do rise again
and fill their banks up to the very brims;
and when my pipe hath eased herself a while,
such store of suitors shall my seat frequent,
that you shall see my scholars be not spent.
spent -quoth you- sister? Then we were to blame, 
if we should say your scholars all were spent: 
but pray now tell me when your painful pen 
will rest enough? when husbandmen sheer hogs.
Melpomene, errato, and the rest,
from thickest shrubs dame Venus did espy
the mortal hatred which you jointly bear
unto your sister high calliope. 
What, do you think if that the tree do bend,
it follows therefore that it needs must break?
And since her pipe a little while doth rest, 
never shall be able for to sound? 
Yes, muses, yes, if that she will vouchsafe 
to entertain dame Venus in her school, 
and further me with her instructions,
she shall have scholars which will deign to be 
in any other muse's company. 
most sacred Venus, do you doubt of that? 
Calliope would think her three times blessed 
for to receive a goddess in her school, 
especially so high an one as you, 
which rules the earth, and guides the heavens too. 
then sound your pipes, and let us bend our steps 
unto the top of high pernassus' hill,
and there together do our best devour
for to describe Alphonsus' warlike fame; 
and, in the manner of a comedy,
set down his noble valor presently.
as Venus wills, so bids calliope. 
and as you bid, your sisters do agree. 
my noble son, since first I did recount
the noble acts your predecessors did 
in Arragon, against their warlike foes,
I never yet could see thee joy at all, 
but hanging down thy head as malcontent 
thy youthful days in mourning have been spent. 
Tell me Alphonsus, what might be the cause 
that makes thee thus to pine away with care?
Hath old carinus done thee any offense 
in reckoning up these stories unto thee? 
What ne'er a word but mum? Alphonsus speak
unless your father's fatal day you seek. 
although dear father, I have often vowed 
ne'er to unfold the secrets of my heart
to any man or woman, who some e'er 
dwells underneath the circle of the sky; 
yet do your words so conjure me, dear sire, 
that needs I must fulfill that you require. 
Then so it is: amongst the famous tales
which you rehearsed done by our fires in war, 
when as you came unto your father's days, 
with sobbing notes, with sighs and blubbering tears, 
and much ado, at length you thus began:
next to Alphonsus should my father come 
for to possess the diadem by right 
of Arragon, but that the wicked wretch 
his younger brother, with aspiring mind, 
by secret treason robbed him of his life,
and me his son of that which was my due.
These words my sire, did so torment my mind, 
as had I been with ixion in hell,
the ravening bird could never plague me worse; 
for ever since my mind hath troubled been 
which way I might revenge this traitorous fact, 
and that recover which is ours by right. 
ah my Alphonsus, never think on that, 
in vain it is to strive against the stream: 
the crown is lost, and now in hucksters hands, 
and all our hope is cast into the dust: 
bridle these thoughts, and learn the same of me, -- 
a quiet life doth pass an empire. 
yet noble father, ere carinus' brood
shall brook his foe for to usurp his seat, 
he'll die the death with honor in the field, 
and so his life and sorrows briefly end. 
But did I know my froward fate we'er such 
as I should fail in this my just attempt;
this sword dear father, should the author be, 
to make an end of this my tragedy. 
Therefore sweet sire, remain you here a while, 
and let me walk my fortune for to try: 
I do not doubt but ere the time be long, 
I'll quite his cost, or else myself will die. 
my noble son, since that thy mind is such 
for to revenge thy father's foul abuse, 
as that my words may not a whit prevail 
to stay thy journey, go with happy fate.
And soon return unto thy father's cell, 
with such a train as julius caesar came
to noble rome, when as he had achieved 
the mighty monarch of the triple world. 
Meantime carinus in this silly grove 
will spend his days with prayers and horizons 
to mighty jove, to further thine intent:
farewell dear son, Alphonsus, fare you well.
and he is gone? Then hie Alphonsus hie, 
to try thy fortune where thy fates do call:
a noble mind disdains to hide his head
and let his foes triumph in his overthrow.
what loitering fellow have we spied here?
Presume not villain further for to go, 
villain say'st thou? Nay, villain in thy throat:
unless you do at length the same repent.
what know'st thou skip-jack, whom thou villain callest? 
a common vassal I do villain call.
that shalt thou soon approve, persuade thyself, 
or else I'll die, or thou shalt die for me. 
what, do I dream, or do my dazzling eyes 
deceive me? Is't Alphonsus that I see? 
Doth now medea use her wonted charms 
for to delude albinus' fantasy? 
Or doth black pluto, king of dark avern,
seek for to flout me with his counterfeit? 
His body like to Alphonsus framed is;
his face resembles much Alphonsus hue; 
his noble mind declares him for no less;
'tis he indeed! Woe worth albinius,
whose babbling tongue hath caused his own annoy. 
Why doth not jove send from the glittering skies 
his thunderbolts to chastise this offense? 
Why doth dame terra cease with greedy laws
to swallow up albinius presently? 
What, shall I fly and hide my traitorous head 
from stout Alphonsus whom I so misused?
Or shall I yield? Tush, yielding is in vain: 
nor can I fly but he will follow me.
Then cast thyself down at his graces feet, 
confess thy fault, and ready make thy beest
to entertain thy well deserved death. 
what news my friend? Why are you now so blank 
that erst before did vaunt it to the skies? 
pardon dear lord, albinius pardon craves 
for this offense, which, by the heavens I vow, 
unwittingly I did unto your grace; 
for had I known Alphonsus had been here,
ere that my tongue had spoke so traitorously,
this hand should make my very soul to die. 
rise up my friend, thy pardon soon is got; 
but prithee tell me, what the cause might be 
that in such sort thou erst upbraidedst me? 
most mighty prince, since first your father's sire
did yield his ghost unto the sisters three, 
and old carinus forced was to fly
his native soil, and royal diadem; 
I, for because I seemed to complain
against their treason, shortly was forewarned 
ne'er more to haunt the bounds of Arragon,
on pain of death; then, like a man forlorn, 
I sought about to find some resting place; 
and at the length did happen upon this shore, 
where showing forth my cruel banishment,
by king Belinus I am succored. 
But now my lord, to answer your demand;
it happens so, that the usurping king 
of Arragon, makes war upon this land,
for certain tribute which he claimeth here:
wherefore Belinus send me round about 
his country, for to gather up his men
for to withstand this most injurious foe;
which being done, returning with the king, 
despitefully I did so taunt your grace, 
imagining you had some soldier been, 
the which, for fear had sneaked from the camp.
enough albinius, I do know thy mind: 
but may it be, that these thy happy news
should be of truth, or have you forged them? 
the gods forbid that ere albinius' tongue
should once be found to forge a feigned tale,
especially unto his sovereign lord: 
but if Alphonsus think that I do fain, 
stay here a while, and you shall plainly see 
my words be true, when as you do perceive 
our royal army march before your face; 
the which, if't please my noble lord to stay,
I'll hasten on with all the speed I may. 
make haste albinius, if you love my life: 
but yet beware, when as your army comes, 
you do not make as though you do me know, 
for I a while a soldier base will be, 
until I find time more convenient
to shew albinius, what is mine intent, 
what e'er Alphonsus fittest doth esteem, 
albinius for his profit best will deem. 
now do I see both gods and fortune too
do join their powers to raise Alphonsus' fame;
for in this broil I do not greatly doubt 
but that I shall my cousins courage tame. 
But see whereas Belinus' army comes,
and he himself unless I guess awry: 
who e'er it be, I do not pass a pin; 
Alphonsus means his soldier for to be.
thus far my lords, we trained have our camp 
for to encounter haughty Arragon, 
who with a mighty power of straggling mates 
hath traitorously assailed this our land, 
and burning towns, and sacking cities fair, 
doth play the devil where some e'er he comes.
Now, as we are informed by our scouts,
he marcheth on unto our chiefest seat,
Naples, I mean, that city of renown,
for to begirt it with his bands about;
and so at length, the which high love forbid, 
to sack the same, as erst he other did.
If which should hap, Belinus were undone, 
his country spoiled, and all his subjects slain. 
Wherefore your sovereign thinketh it most meet 
for to prevent the fury of the foe, 
and Naples succor, that distressed town, 
by entering in, ere Arragon doth come, 
with all our men,which will sufficient be 
for to withstand their cruel battery. 
the silly serpent, found by country swain,
and cut in pieces by his furious blows, 
yet if her head do scape away untouched,
as many write, it very strangely goes
to fetch an herb, with which in little time 
her battered corpse again she doth conjoin:
but if by chance the ploughman's sturdy staff, 
do hap to hit upon the serpent's head, 
and bruise the same, though all the rest be sound, 
yet doth the silly serpent lie for dead; 
nor can the rest of all her body serve
to find a salve which may her life preserve. 
Even so my lord, if Naples once be lost 
which is the head of all your grace's land,
easy it were for the malicious foe, 
to get the other cities in their hand:
but if from them that Naples town be free, 
I do not doubt but safe the rest shall be. 
And therefore mighty king, I think it best,
to succor Naples, rather then the rest.
'tis bravely spoken; by my crown I swear
I like thy counsel, and will follow it. 
But hark albinius, dost thou know the man 
that doth so closely overthwart us stand?
not I, my lord for never saw him yet. 
then prithee, go and ask him presently, 
what country man he is, and why he comes 
into this place? Perhaps he is some one
that is sent hither as a secret spy 
to hear and see in secret what we do.
my friend, what art thou, that so like a spy 
dost sneak about Belinus' royal camp? 
I am a man.  a man? We know the same:
but prithee tell me, and set scoffing by, 
what country man thou art, and why you come,
that we may soon resolve the king thereof?
why, say I am a soldier.  of whose band? 
of his that will most wages to me give.
content to serve Belinus in his wars?

if he will reward me as I do deserve,
and grant what e'er I win, it shall be mine 
believe me sir, your service costly is: 
but stay a while, and I will bring you word 
what king Belinus says unto the same.
what news albinius? Who is that we see?
it is, my lord, a soldier that you see, 
who fain would serve your grace in these your wars, 
but that, I fear his service is too dear. 
too dear? Why so? What doth the soldier crave?
he craves my lord, all things that with his sword
he doth obtain, what ever that they be. 
content my friend; if thou wilt succor me, 
what e'er you get, that challenge as thine own; 
Belinus gives it frankly unto thee,
although it be the crown of Arragon.
Come on, therefore, and let us hie apace
to Naples town, whereas by this, I know,
our foes have pitched their tents against our walls. 
march on, my lord, for I will follow you; 
and do not doubt but, ere the time be long, 
I shall obtain the crown of Arragon. 
thus from the pit of pilgrim's poverty 
Alphonsus gins by step and step, to climb 
unto the top of friendly fortune's wheel: 
from banished state, as you have plainly seen, 
he is transformed into a soldiers life, 
and marcheth in the ensign of the king
of worthy Naples, which Belinus hight; 
not for because that he doth love him so, 
but that he may revenge him on his foe.
Now on the top of lusty barbed steed
he mounted is, in glittering armor clad,
seeking about the troops of Arragon, 
for to encounter with his traitorous niece. 
How he doth speed, and what doth him befall,
mark this our act, for it doth shew it all. 
go pack thou hence unto the stygian lake, 
and make report unto thy traitorous sire 
how well thou hast enjoyed the diadem 
which he by treason set upon thy head; 
and if he ask thee who did send thee down, 
Alphonsus, say who now must wear thy crown. 
traitor, how darest thou look me in the face, 
whose mighty king thou traitorously hast slain
what, dost thou think flaminius hath no friends 
for to revenge his death on thee again? 
Yes, be you sure that, ere you escape from hence,
thy gasping ghost shall bear him company, 
or else myself fighting for his defense, 
will be content, by those thy hands to die. 
laelius, few words would better thee become, 
especially as now the case doth stand; 
and didst thou know whom thou dost threaten thus, 
we should you have more calmer out of hand: 
for laelius know, that I Alphonsus am, 
the son and heir to old carinus, whom
the traitorous father of flaminius 
did secretly bereave of his diadem. 
But see the just revenge of mighty love!
The father dead, the son is likewise slain
by that man's hand who they did count as dead,
yet doth survive to wear the diadem, 
when they themselves accompany the ghosts 
which wander round about the stygian fields. 
Muse not here at, for it is true I say; 
I am Alphonsus, whom thou hast misused. 
the man whose death I did so oft lament? 
Then pardon me for these uncourteous words, 
the which I in my rage did utter forth,
pricked by the duty of a loyal mind; 
pardon, Alphonsus, this my first offense,
and let me die if e'er I slight again.
laelius, I fain would pardon this offense,
and eke accept thee to my grace again,
but that I fear that, when I stand in need 
and want your help, you will your lord betray: 
how say you laelius, may I trust to thee?
I, noble lord, by all the gods I vow; 
for first shall heavens want stars, and foaming seas 
want watery drops, before I'll traitor be
unto Alphonsus, whom I honor so.
well then, arise; and for because I'll try 
if that thy words and deeds be both alike,
go haste and fetch the youths of Arragon,
which now I hear have turned their heels and fled:
tell them your chance, and bring them back again
into this wood; where in ambushment lie 
until I come or send for you myself.
full little think Belinus and his peers 
what thoughts Alphonsus casteth in his mind; 
for if they did, they would not greatly haste
to pay the same the which they promised me. 
like simple sheep, when shepherd absent is,
far from his flock, assailed by greedy wolves,
do scattering fly about, some here, some there, 
to keep their bodies from their ravening laws, 
so do the fearful youths of Arragon 
run round about the green and pleasant plains,
and hide their heads from neapolitans:
such terror have their strong and sturdy blows
struck to their hearts, as for a world of gold,
I warrant you, they will not come again. 
But noble lords, where is the knight become 
which made the blood besprinkle all the place
whereas he did encounter with his foe? 
My friend albinius, know you where he is?
not I my lord, for since in thickest ranks 
I saw him chase flaminius at the heels,
I never yet could set mine eyes on him.
But see, my lord, whereas the warrior stands, 
or else my sight doth fail me at this time. 
'tis he indeed, who, as I do suppose, 
hath slain the king or else some other lord,
for well I wot, a carcass I did see
hard at his feet lie struggling on the ground. 
Come on, albinius, we will try the truth.
Hail to the noble victor of our foes. 
thanks mighty prince, but yet I seek not this: 
it is not words must recompense my pain, 
but deeds: when I first took up arms for you, 
your promise was, what e'er my sword did win
in fight, as his Alphonsus should it crave. 
See then where lies thy foe flaminius,
whose crown my sword hath conquered in the field; 
therefore Belinus, make no long delay,
but that discharge your promise for to pay. 
will nothing else satisfy thy conquering mind 
besides the crown? Well, since thou hast it won,
thou shalt it have, though far against my will. 
Here doth Belinus crown thee with his hand 
the king of Arragon. -- What, are you pleased? 
not so Belinus, till you promise me
all things belonging to the royal crown
of Arragon, and make your lordings swear 
for to defend me to their utmost power
against all men that shall gainsay the same. 
mark, what belonged erst unto the crown 
of Arragon, that challenge as thine own; 
Belinus gives it frankly unto thee,
and swears by all the powers of glittering skies, 
to do my best for to maintain the same; 
so that it be not prejudicial 
unto mine honor, or my country soil.
and by the sacred seat of mighty love 
albinius swears that first he'll die the death
before he'll see Alphonsus suffer wrong.
what erst albinius would we jointly vow.
thanks mighty lords; but yet I greatly fear 
that very few will keep the oaths they swear.
But what Belinus, why stand you so long,
and cease from offering homage unto me? 
What, know you not that I thy sovereign am, 
crowned by thee and all thy other lords, 
and now confirmed by your solemn oaths? 
Feed not thyself with fond persuasions,
but presently come yield thy crown to me,
and do me homage, or by heavens I swear 
I'll force thee do it maugre all thy train. 
how now base brat? What are thy wits thine own, 
that thou darest thus abraid me in my land? 
'tis best for thee these speeches to recall, 
or else, by love, I'll make thee to repent 
that ere thou settest thy foot in Naples' soil. 
base brat, sayest thou? As good a man as thou: 
but say I came but of a base descent,
my deeds shall make my glory for to shine
as clear as luna in a winter's night. 
But for because thou braggest so of thy birth, 
I'll see how it shall profit thee anon. 
Alphonsus, cease from these thy threat'ning words,
and lay aside this thy presumptuous mind, 
or else be sure thou shalt the same repent. 
how now sir boy, will you be prattling too? 
'Tis best for thee to hold thy tattling tongue,
unless I send some one to scourge thy breech. 
Why then I see 'tis time to look about 
when every boy Alphonsus dares control: 
but be they sure, ere phoebus' golden beams 
have compassed the circle of the sky, 
I'll clog their tongues, since nothing else will serve 
to keep those wild and threat'ning speeches in. 
Farewell Belinus, lock thou to thyself: 
Alphonsus means to have thy crown ere night. 
what, is he gone? The devil break his neck,
the fiends of hell torment his traitorous corpse: 
is this the quittance of Belinus' grace, 
which he did shew unto that thankless wretch,
that runagate, that rachell, yea that thief?
For well I wot, he hath robbed me of a crown. 
If ever he had sprung from gentle blood, 
he would not thus misuse his favorer. 
that runagate, that rachell, yea that thief!
Stay there sir king, your mouth runs over much; 
it ill becomes the subject for to use 
such traitorous terms against his sovereign. 
Know thou Belinus, that carinus son
is neither rachell nor a runagate:
but be thou sure that, ere the darksome night
do drive god phoebus to his thetis' lap, 
both thou and all the rest of this thy train, 
shall well repent the words which you have said. 
what, traitorous villain, dost thou threaten me? -- 
Lay hold on him, and see he do not escape; 
I'll teach the slave to know to whom he speaks. 
to thee I speak, and to thy fellows all; 
and though as now you have me in your power, 
yet doubt not but that in little space
these eyes shall see thy treason recompensed, 
and then I mean to vaunt our victory. 
Beli, nay proud albinius, never build on that;
for though the gods do chance for to appoint
Alphonsus victor of Belinus' land, 
yet shalt thou never live to see that day:- 
and therefore Fabius, stand not lingering, 
but presently slash off his traitorous head. 
slash off his head? As though albinius' head 
were then so easy to be slashed off: 
i'faith sir, no; when you are gone and dead,
I hope to flourish like the pleasant spring.
why, how now Fabius? What, do you stand in doubt
to do the deed? What fear you? Who dares seek
for to revenge his death on thee again, 
since that Belinus did command it so? 
Or are you waxed so dainty that you dare 
not use your sword for staining of your hands? 
If it be so, then let me see thy sword,
and I will be his butcher for this time. 
Now sir albinius, are you of the mind
that erst you were? What, do you look to see, 
and triumph in Belinus overthrow?
I hope the very sight of this my blade 
hath changed your mind into an other tune. 
not so Belinus, I am constant still. 
My mind is like to the abeston stone, 
which, if it once be heat in flames of fire, 
denieth to becomen cold again:
even so am I, and shall be till I die; 
and though I should see atropos appear 
with knife in hand, to flit my thread in twain, 
yet ne'er albinius should persuaded be 
but that Belinus he should vanquished see.
nay then albinius, since that words are vain 
for to persuade you from this heresy,
this sword shall sure put you out of doubt. 
my noble lords of Arragon, I know 
you wonder much what might the occasion be
that laelius, which erst did fly the field, 
doth egg you forwards now unto the wars; 
but when you hear my reason, out of doubt
you'll be content with this my rash attempt. 
When first our king, flaminius I do mean, 
did set upon the neapolitans, 
the worst of you did know and plainly see 
how far they were unable to withstand 
the mighty forces of our royal camp,
until such time as forward fates we thought, -- 
although the fates ordained it for our gain, --
did send a stranger stout, whose sturdy blows
and force alone, did cause our overthrow. 
But to our purpose; this same martial knight
did hap to hit upon flaminius
and lent our king then such a friendly blow 
as that his gasping ghost to limbo went.
Which, when I saw, and seeking to revenge,
my noble lords, did hap on such a prize
as never king nor keiser got the like.
Laelius, of force we must confess to thee, 
we wondered all whenas you did persuade 
us to return unto the wars again; 
but since our marvel is increased much
by these your words, which sound of happiness: 
therefore good laelius, make no tarrying, 
but soon unfold thy happy chance to us. 
then friends and fellow soldiers, hark to me;
when laelius thought for to revenge his king 
on that same knight, instead of mortal foe, 
I found him for to be our chiefest friend. 
our chiefest friend? I hardly can believe 
that he, which made such bloody massacres
of stout italians, can in any point 
bear friendship to the country or the king.
as for your king miles, I hold with you, 
he bear no friendship to flaminius,
but hated him as bloody atropos; 
but for your country, laelius doth avow, 
he loves as well as any other land; 
yea sure, he loves it best of all the world. 
And for because you shall not think that I 
do say the same without a reason why,
know that the knight Alphonsus hath to name, 
both son and heir to old carinus, whom
flaminius' sire bereaved of his crown; 
who did not seek the ruin of our host
for any envy he did bear to us, 
but to revenge him on his mortal foe;
which by the help of high celestial love, 
he hath achieved with honor in the field. 
Alphonsus, man? I'll ne'er persuaded be
that ere Alphonsus may survive again,
who with carinus, many years ago, 
was said to wander in the stygian fields. 
truth noble miles; these mine ears have heard,
for certainty reported unto me, 
that old carinus, with his peerless son,
had felt the sharpness of the sisters shears; 
and had I not of late Alphonsus seen 
in good estate, though all the world should say 
he is alive, I would not credit them:
bur fellow soldiers, wend you back with me,
and let us lurk within the secret shade 
which he himself appointed unto us; 
and if you find my words to be untruth, 
then let me die to recompense the wrong. 
laelius make haste: soldiers of Arragon, 
set lingering by, and come and help your king, 
I mean Alphonsus, who, whilest that he did 
pursue Belinus at the very heels, 
was suddenly environed about
with all the troops of mighty millain land. 
what news is this? And is it very so? 
Is our Alphonsus yet in human state,
whom all the world did judge for to be dead?
Yet can I scarce give credit to the same: 
give credit? Yes, and since the millain duke
hath broke his league of friendship, be he sure,
ere cynthia, the shining lamp of night,
doth scale the heavens with her horned head, 
both he and his shall very plainly see 
the league is burst, that caused long the glee. 
and could the traitor harbor in his breast 
such mortal treason 'gainst his sovereign, 
as when he should with fire and sword defend 
him from his foes, he seeks his overthrow? 
March on my friend: I ne'er shall joy at all, 
until I see that bloody traitor's fall. 
no sooner did Alphonsus with his troop
set on the soldiers of Belinus' band, 
but that the fury of his sturdy blows 
did strike such terror to their daunted minds 
that glad was he which could escape away 
with life and limb, forth of that bloody fray.
Belinus flies unto the turkish soil,
to crave the aid of Amurack their king; 
unto the which he willingly did consent, 
and sends Belinus, with two other kings, 
to know god Mahomet's pleasure in the same. 
Mean time the empress by medea's help, 
did use such charms that Amurack did see, 
in soundest sleep, what afterward should hap: 
how Amurack did recompense her pain, 
with mickle more, this act shall shew you plain. 
welcome brave youths of Arragon, to me, 
yea welcome, miles, laelius, and the rest
whose prowess alone hath been the only cause 
that we, like victors, have subdued our foes.
Lord, what a pleasure was it to my mind, 
to see Belinus, which not long before
did with his threat'nings terrify the gods, 
now scudded apace from warlike laelius' blows, 
the duke of Millaine, he increased our sport,
who, doubting that his force was overweak 
for to withstand miles, thy sturdy army, 
did give more credence to his striking skips 
then to the sharpness of his cutting blade.
What Fabius did to pleasure us withal,
albinus knows as well as I myself; 
for, well I wot, if that thy tired steed
had been as fresh and swift in foot as his, 
he should have felt, yea known for certainty, 
to check Alphonsus, did deserve to die. 
Briefly, my friends, and fellow peers in arms,
the worst of you deserve such mickle praise, 
as that my tongue denies for to set forth
the deny parcel of your valiant deeds; 
so that perforce, I must by duty be 
bound to you all, for this your courtesy.
not so my lord; for if our willing arms 
have pleasured you as much as you do say, 
he have done nought but that becometh us,
for to defend our mighty sovereign. 
As for my part, I count my labor small, 
yea though it had been twice as much again, 
since that Alphonsus doth accept thereof.
thanks, worthy miles: least all the world 
should count Alphonsus thankless for to be, 
laelius, sit down, and, miles sit by him, 
and that receive the which your swords have won.
First, for because thou, laelius, in these broils,
by martial might didst proud Belinus chase 
from troop to troop, from side to side about,
and never ceased from this thy swift pursuit 
until thou hadst obtained his royal crown, 
therefore I say, I'll do thee nought but right, 
and give thee that the which thou well hast won.
Here doth Alphonsus crown thee laelius, king 
of Naples town, with all dominions 
that erst belonged to our traitorous foe,
that proud Belinus in his regiment. 
Miles, thy share the millain dukedom is,
for, well I wot, thy sword deserved no less.
The which Alphonsus frankly giveth thee, 
in presence of his warlike men at arms; 
and if that any stomach this my deed, 
Alphonsus can revenge thy wrong with speed. 
Now to albinius, which in all my toils 
I have both faithful, yea, and friendly found: 
since that the gods and friendly fates assign 
this present time to me to recompense 
the sundry pleasures thou hast done to me,
sit down by them, and on thy faithful head 
receive the crown of peerless Arragon. 
pardon dear lord, albinius at this time; 
it ill becomes me for to wear a crown 
when as my lord is destitute himself: 
why, high Alphonsus, if I should receive 
this crown of you, the which high love forbid,
where would yourself obtain a diadem? 
Naples is gone, Millaine possessed is, 
and nought is left for you but Arragon.
and nought is left for me but Arragon? 
Yes, surely yes, my fates have so decreed,
that Arragon should be too base a thing
for to obtain Alphonsus for her king. 
What, hear you not how that our scattered foes,
Belinus, Fabius, and the Millaine duke,
are fled for succor to the turkish court? 
And think you not that Amurack their king 
will, with the mightiest power of all his land, 
seek to revenge Belinus overthrow?
Then doubt I not but ere these broils do end, 
Alphonsus shall possess the diadem 
that Amurack now wears upon his head.
Sit down therefore, and that receive of me,
the which the fates appointed unto thee. 
thou king of heaven, which by thy power divine
dost see the secrets of each liver's heart,
bear record now with what unwilling mind
I do receive the crown of Arragon. 
arise albinius, king of Arragon, 
crowned by me, who, till my gasping ghost
do part asunder from my breathless corpse, 
will be thy shield against all men alive 
that for thy kingdom any way do strive. 
Now since we have, in such an happy hour, 
confirmed three kings, come, let us march with speed 
into the city, for to celebrate 
with mirth and joy this blissful festival.
welcome Belinus, to thy cousins court, 
whose late arrival in such posting pace
doth bring both joy and sorrow to us all; 
sorrow, because the fates have been so false 
to let Alphonsus drive thee from thy land, 
and joy, since that now mighty Mahomet 
hath given me cause to recompense at full
the sundry pleasures I received of thee. 
Therefore Belinus, do but ask and have, 
for Amurack doth grant what e'er you crave. 
thou second sun, which with thy glimpsing beams
doest clarify each corner of the earth, 
Belinus comes not, as erst midas did
to mighty bacchus, to desire of him 
that what so e'er at any time he touched 
might turned be to gold incontinent. 
Nor do I come as jupiter did erst 
unto the palace of amphitrion, 
for any fond or foul concupiscence.
Which I do bear to alcumenae's hue. 
But as poor saturn, forced by mighty love 
to fly his country, banished and forlorn, 
did crave the aid of troos king of troy; 
so comes Belinus to high Amurack, 
and if he can but once your aid obtain, 
he turns with speed to Naples back again.
my aid Belinus? Do you doubt of that?
If all the men at arms of africa, 
of asia likewise, will sufficient be
to press the pomp of that usurping mate; 
assure thyself thy kingdom shall be thine, 
if Mahomet say I unto the same; 
for were I sure to vanquish all our foes,
and find such spoils in ransacking their tents
as never any keiser did obtain, 
yet would I not set foot forth of this land, 
if Mahomet our journey did withstand. 
nor would Belinus, for king croesus' trash, 
wish Amurack so to displease the gods
in pleasuring me in such a trifling toy.
Then, mighty monarch, if it be thy will, 
get their consents, and then the act fulfill.
you counsel well; therefore, Belinus, haste,
and, claramount, go bear him company, 
with king arcastus, to the city walls: 
then bend with speed unto the darksome grove 
where Mahomet, this many a hundred year,
hath prophesied unto our ancestors. 
Tell to his priests, that Amurack your king,
is now selecting all his men at arms 
to set upon that proud Alphonsus' troop. 
The cause you know, and can inform him well,
that makes me take these bloody broils in hand: 
and say, that I desire their sacred god, 
that Mahomet which rules all the skies,
to send me word, and that most speedily, 
which of us shall obtain the victory. 
You, bajazeth, go post away apace
to syria, scythia, and albania,
to babylon, with mesopotamia,
asia, armenia, and all other lands 
which owe their homage to high Amurack: 
charge all their kings with expedition 
to gather up the chiefest men at arms
which now remain in their dominions,
and on the twentieth day of the same month
to come and wait on Amurack their king 
at his chief city constantinople. 
Tell them, moreover, that who so doth fail, 
nought else but death from prison shall him bail. 
What heavenly music soundeth in my ear?
Peace Amurack, and hearken to the same. 
now have our charms fulfilled our minds full well: 
high Amurack is lulled fast a sleep, 
and doubt I not but, ere he wakes again, 
you shall perceive medea did not gibe 
when as she put this practice in your mind: 
sit, worthy Fausta, at thy spouse his feet. 
Iphigenia, sit thou on the other side:
but bear in mind what Amurack doth chat. 
What e'er you see, be not aghast thereat,
thou, which were't wont in agamemnon's days,
to utter forth apollo's oracles 
at sacred delphos, calchas I do mean,
I charge thee come: all lingering set aside, 
unless the penance you thereof abide:
I conjure thee, by pluto's loathsome lake, 
by all the hags which harbor in the same,
by stinking styx and filthy phlegeton, 
to come with speed, and truly to fulfill
that which medea to thee straight shall will. 
thou wretched witch, when wilt thou make an end
of troubling us with these thy cursed charms? 
What mean'st thou thus to call me from my grave?
Shall ne'er my ghost obtain his quiet rest? 
yes, calchas yes, your rest doth now approach; 
medea means to trouble thee no more,
when as thou hast fulfilled her mind this once.
Go get thee hence to pluto back again, 
and there inquire of the destinies
how Amurack shall speed in these his wars:
peruse their books, and mark what is decreed 
by love himself and all his fellow gods; 
and when thou know'st the certainty thereof, 
by fleshless vision shew it presently 
to Amurack, in pain of penalty. 
forced by thy charm, though with unwilling mind,
I hast to hell, the certainty to find. 
now peerless princes, I must needs be gone; 
my hasty business calls me from this place.
There resteth nought, but that you bear in mind 
what Amurack in this his fit doth say; 
for mark what dreaming, madam, he doth pray
assure yourself that that shall be his fate. 
though very loath to let thee so depart, 
farewell medea, easer of my heart. 
what Amurack, doest thou begin to nod? 
Is this the care that thou hast of thy wars? 
As when thou shouldst be prancing of thy steed,
to egg thy soldiers forward in thy wars,
thou sittest moping by the fireside?
See where thy viceroys grovel on the ground, 
look where Belinus breatheth forth his ghost, 
behold by millions how thy men do fall 
before Alphonsus, like to silly sheep. 
And canst thou stand still lazing in this sort?
No proud Alphonsus, Amurack does fly
to quail thy courage, and that speedily. 
And doest thou think, thou proud injurious god, 
mahound I mean, since thy vain prophecies 
led Amurack into this doleful case,
to have his princely feet in irons clapped, 
which erst the proudest kings were forced to kiss,
that thou shalt scape unpunished for the same?
No, no, as soon as by the help of love, 
I scape this bondage, down go all thy groves, 
thy altars tumble round the streets, 
and whereas erst we sacrificed to thee,
now all the turks thy mortal foes shall bee.
Behold the gem and jewel of mine age, 
see where she comes, whose heavenly majesty 
doth far surpass the brave and gorgeous pace
which cytherea, daughter unto love,
did put in ure when as she had obtained 
the golden apple at the shepherds hands. 
See, worthy Fausta, where Alphonsus stands, 
whose valiant courage could not daunted be
with all the men at arms of africa; 
see now he stands as one that lately saw 
medusa's head, or gorgon's hoary hue.
And can it be that it may happen so? 
Can fortune prove so friendly unto me
as that Alphonsus loves Iphigina? 
The match is made, the wedding is decreed: 
sound trumpets, haw, strike drums for mirth and glee: 
and three times welcome son in law to me.
fie Amurack, what wicked words be these? 
How canst thou look thy Fausta in the face,
whom thou hast wronged in this shameful sort? 
And are the vows so solemnly you sware 
unto Belinus, my most friendly niece, 
now washed so clearly from thy traitorous heart? 
Is all the rancor which you erst did bear 
unto Alphonsus worn so out of mind 
as, where thou shouldst pursue him to death
you seek to give our daughter to his hands? 
The gods forbid that such a heinous deed, 
with my consent, should ever be decreed: 
and rather then thou shouldst it bring to pass, 
will be sufficient to withhold the same,
assure thyself that Fausta means to fight
'gainst Amurack, for to maintain the right. 
yea mother, say, which Mahomet forbid, 
that in this conflict you should have the foil,
ere that Alphonsus should be called my spouse,
this heart, this hand, yea, and this blade, should be 
a readier means to finish that decree. 
what threatening words thus thunder in mine ears? 
Or who are they, amongst the mortal troops,
that dares presume to use such threats to me? 
The proudest kings and keiser of the land 
are glad to feed me in my fantasy; 
and shall I suffer then, each prattling dame 
for to upbraid me in this spiteful sort? 
No, by the heavens, first will I lose my crown, 
my wife, my children, yea, my life and all: 
and therefore Fausta, thou which Amurack 
did tender erst as the apple of mine eye, 
avoid my court, and, if thou lov'st thy life,
approach not nigh unto my regiment. 
As for this carping girl Iphigina,
take her with thee to bear thee company,
and in my land I reed be seen no more,
for if you do, you both shall die therefore. 
nay, then, I see 'tis time to look about,
delay is dangerous, and procureth harm: 
the wanton colt is tamed in his youth, 
wounds must be cured when they be fresh and green, 
and plurifies, when they begin to breed 
with little ease, are driven away with speed.
Had Fausta then when Amurack begun, 
with spiteful speeches to control and check,
sought to prevent it by her martial force, 
but the echinus, fearing to be gored, 
doth keep her younglings in her paunch so long, 
till, when their pricks be waxen long and sharp, 
they put their dame at length to double pain: 
and I, because I loathed the broils of mars, 
bridled my thoughts and pressed down my rage; 
in recompense of which my good intent, 
I have received this woeful banishment. 
Woeful, said i? Nay, happy I did mean, 
if that be happy which doth set one free:
for by this means I do not doubt ere long
but Fausta shall with ease revenge her wrong, 
come, daughter come: my mind foretelleth me 
that Amurack shall soon requited be. 
Fausta, what means this sudden flight of yours?
Why do you leave your husband's princely court, 
and all alone pass through these thickest groves, 
more fit to harbor brutish savaged beasts 
then to receive so high a queen as you? 
Although your credit would not stay your steps 
from bending them into these darkish dens,
yet should the danger, which is imminent 
to every one which passeth by these paths, 
keep you at home with fair Iphigina.
What foolish toy has tickled you to this?
I greatly fear some hap hath hit aims.
no toy, medea, tickled fasta's head,
nor foolish fancy led me to these groves, 
but earnest business eggs my trembling steps 
to pass all dangers what e'er they be.
I banished am medea, I, which erst
was empress over all the triple world,
am banished now from palace and from pomp. 
But if the gods be favors to me, 
ere twenty days I will revenged be.
I thought as much, when first from thickest leaves
I saw you trudging in such posting pace.
But to the purpose; what may be the cause 
of this so strange and sudden banishment? 
Fau, the cause, ask you? A simple cause, god wot:
'twas neither treason, nor yet felony, 
but for because I blamed his foolishness. 
I hear you say so, but I greatly fear,
ere that your tale be brought unto an end,
you'll prove yourself the author of the same. 
But pray be brief: what folly did your spouse?
And how will you revenge your wrong on him? 
what folly, quoth you ? Such as never yet
was heard or seen, since phoebus first can shine.
You know how he was gathering in all haste 
his men at arms, to set upon the troop 
of proud Alphonsus;, yea, you well do know 
how you and I did do the best we could 
to make him shew us in his drowsy dream
what afterward should happen in his wars. 
Much talk he had, which now I have forgot; 
but at the length, this surely was decreed, 
how that Alphonsus and Iphigina 
should be conjoined in juno's sacred rites.
Which when I heard, as one that did despise 
that such a traitor should be son to me, 
I did rebuke my husband Amurack:
and since my words could take no better place, 
shall make him soon repent his foolishness. 
this is the cause then, of your banishment? 
to gather all your maidens in array,
to set upon the mighty Amurack? 
O foolish queen, what meant you by this talk?
Those prattling speeches have undone you all.
Do you disdain to have that mighty prince,
I mean Alphonsus, counted for your son?
I tell you Fausta, he is born to be 
the ruler of a mighty monarchy: 
I must confess the powers of Amurack
be great; his confines stretch both far and near; 
yet are they not the third part of the lands 
which shall be ruled by Alphonsus' hands: 
and yet you dain to call him son in law: 
but when you see his sharp and cutting sword 
piercing the heart of this your gallant girl, 
you'll curse the hour wherein you did denay 
to join Alphonsus with Iphigina. 
Fau, the gods forbid that e'er it happen so. 
nay, never pray, for it must happen so. 
and is there then, no remedy for it? 
no, none but one, and that you have forsworn. 
as though an oath can bridle so my mind 
as that I dare not break a thousand oaths 
for to eschew the danger eminent. 
Speak good medea, tell that way to me. 
And I will do it, what so e'er it be. 
then, as already you have well decreed, 
pack to your country, and in readiness 
when you have done, march with your female troop 
to Naples town, to succor Amurack: 
and so, by marriage of Iphigina, 
you soon shall drive the danger clean away.
So shall we soon eschew charybdis' lake, 
and headlong fall to scylla's gulf; 
I vowed before, and now do vow again,
before I wed Alphonsus, I'll be slain. 
in vain it is to strive against the stream;
fates must be followed, and the gods decree 
must needs take place in every kind of cause. 
Therefore, fair maid, bridle these brutish thoughts,
and learn to follow what the fates assign.
When saturn heard that jupiter his son 
should drive him headlong from his heavenly seat, 
down to the bottom of the dark avern,
he did command his mother presently 
to do to death the young and guiltless child:
but what of that? The mother loathed in heart 
for to commit so vile a massacre;
yea, love did live, and, as the fates did say, 
from heavenly seat drave saturn clean away. 
What did avail the castle all of steel, 
the which arcisius caused to be made 
to keep his daughter danae clogged in? 
She was with child for all her castles' force; 
and by that child, arcisius, her sire,
was after slain, so did the fates require. 
Thousand examples I could bring hereof;
but marble stones do need no coloring, 
and that which every one doth know for truth 
needs no examples to confirm the same. 
That which the fates appoint must happen so, 
though heavenly love, and all the gods say no.
Iphigina, she saith naught but truth,
fates must be followed in their just decrees;
and therefore, setting all delays aside,
and gather up our forces out of hand.
since Fausta wills, and fates do so command,
Iphigina will never it withstand.
thus have you seen how Amurack himself, 
Fausta his wife, and every other king 
which holds their sceptres at the turk his hands, 
are now in arms, intending to destroy, 
and bring to nought, the prince of Arragon. 
Charms have been used by wise medea's art, 
to know before what afterward shall hap; 
and king Belinus, with high claramount, 
joined to arcastus; which with princely pomp 
doth rule and govern all the warlike moors,
are sent as legates to god Mahomet, 
to know his counsel in these high affairs.
Mahound, provoked by Amurack's discourse, 
which, as you heard, he in his dream did use, 
denies to play the prophet any more;
but, by the long entreaty of his priests,
he prophecies in such a crafty sort 
as that the hearers needs must laugh for sport. 
Yet poor Belinus, with his fellow kings,
did give such credence to that forged tale
as that they lost their dearest lives thereby, 
and Amurack became a prisoner
unto Alphonsus, as straight shall appear. 
my fellow priest of mahound's holy house, 
what can you judge of these strange miracles 
which daily happen in this sacred seat? 
Hark what a rumbling rattleth in our ears. 
See flakes of fire proceeding from the mouth
of Mahomet, that god of peerless power.
Nor can I tell, with all the wit I have, 
what Mahomet, by these his signs, doth crave. 
thrice ten times phoebus with his golden beams
hath compassed the circle of the sky, 
thrice ten times ceres hath her workmen hired,
and filled her barns with fruitful crops of corn,
since first in priesthood I did lead my life;
yet in this time I never heard before
such fearful sounds, nor saw such wondrous sights;
nor can I tell, with all the wit I have, 
what Mahomet, by these his signs, doth crave. 
you cannot tell, nor will you seek to know: 
O perverse priests, how careless are you waxed; 
as when my foes approach unto my gates,
you stand still talking of I cannot tell:
go pack you hence, and meet the turkish kings, 
which now are drawing to my temples ward:
tell them from me, god Mahomet is disposed
to prophesy no more to Amurack, 
since that his tongue is waxen now so free
as that it needs must chat and rail at me. 
O Mahomet, if all the solemn prayers 
which from our childhood we have offered thee, 
can make thee call this sentence back again. 
Bring not thy priests into this dangerous state:
for when the turk doth hear of this repulse, 
we shall be sure to die the death therefore.
thou saith truth: go call the princes in: 
I'll prophesy unto them for this once; 
but in such wise as they shall neither boast,
nor you hurt in any kind of wise. 
you kings of turkey, Mahomet our god, 
by sacred science having notice that
you were sent legates from high Amurack 
unto this place, commanded us, his priests, 
that we should cause you make as mickle speed 
as well you might, to hear for certainty 
of that shall happen to your king, and ye.
for that intent we came into this place; 
and sithens that the mighty Mahomet
is now at leisure for to tell the same, 
let us make haste and take time while we may; 
for mickle danger happeneth through delay. 
truth, worthy king, and therefore you yourself, 
with your companions, kneel before this place, 
and listen well what Mahomet doth say.
as you do will, we jointly will obey. 
princes of turkey, and embassadors 
of Amurack to mighty Mahomet, 
I needs must muse that you, which erst have been
the readiest soldiers of the triple world, 
are now become so slack in your affairs 
as, when you should with bloody blade in hand 
be hacking helms in thickest of your foes, 
you stand still loitering on the turkish soil. 
What, know you not that it is decreed
by all the gods, and chiefly by myself,
that you with triumph should all crowned be?
Make haste then kings, lest when the fates do see 
how carelessly you do neglect their words. 
They call a counsel, and force Mahomet 
against his will some other thing to set.
Send Fabius back to Amurack again,
to haste him forwards in his enterprise;
and march you on, with all the troops you have, 
to Naples ward, to conquer Arragon; 
for if you stay, both you and all your men
must needs be sent down straight to limbo den. 
muse not, brave kings, at Mahomet's discourse,
for mark what he forth of that mouth doth say
assure yourselves it needs must happen so; 
therefore make haste, go mount you on your steeds, 
and set upon Alphonsus presently:
so shall you reap great honor for your pain, 
and scape the scourge which else the fates ordain.
then, proud Alphonsus, look thou to thy crown: 
Belinus comes, in glittering armor clad,
all ready pressed for to revenge the wrong
which, not long since, you offered unto him; 
and since we have god mahound on our side, 
the victory must needs to us betide. 
Worthy Belinus, set such threats away, 
and let us haste as fast as horse can trot, 
to set upon presumptuous Arragon.- 
You Fabius, haste, as mahound did command,
to Amurack with all the speed you may. 
with willing mind I hasten on my way.
and thinking long till that we be in fight,
Belinus hastes to quail Alphonsus' might.
no sooner had god phoebus' brightsome beams
begun to dive within the western seas, 
and darksome nox had spread about the earth 
her blackish mantle, but a drowsy sleep 
did take possession of carinus' sense,
and morpheus shewed me strange disguised shapes. 
Methought I saw Alphonsus, my dear son, 
placed in a throne all glittering clear with gold, 
bedecked with diamonds, pearls and precious stones,
which shined so clear and glittered all so bright, 
hyperion's coach that well be termed it might. 
Above his head a canopy was set, 
not decked with plumes, as other princes use, 
but all beset with heads of conquered kings, 
enstalled with crowns, which made a gallant shew, 
and struck a terror to the viewers' hearts.
Under his feet lay grovelling on the ground
thousand of princes, which he in his wars 
by martial might did conquer and bring low:
some lay as dead as either stock or stone,
some other tumbled, wounded to the death; 
but most of them, as to their sovereign king, 
did offer duly homage unto him.
As thus I stood beholding of this pomp, 
methought Alphonsus did espy me out, 
and, at a trice, he leaving throne alone, 
came to embrace me in his blessed arms. 
Then noise of drums and sound of trumpets shrill
did wake carinus from this pleasant dream. 
Something, I know, is now foreshown by this:
the gods forfend that ought should hap aims. 
this is the chance of fickle fortune's wheel; 
a prince at morn, a pilgrim ere it be night. 
I, which erewhile did deign for to possess 
the proudest palace of the western world, 
would now be glad a cottage for to find,
to hide my head; so fortune hath assigned. 
Thrice hesperus with pomp and peerless pride 
hath heaved his head forth of the eastern seas,
thrice cynthia, with phoebus' borrowed beams, 
hath shown her beauty through the darkish clouds, 
since that I, wretched duke, have tasted ought, 
or drunk a drop of any kind of drink. 
Instead of bed set forth with ebony, 
the greenish grass hath been my resting place;
and, for my pillow stuffed soft with down 
the hardish hillocks have sufficed my turn.
Thus I, which erst had all the things at my will, 
a life more hard then death do follow still. 
methinks I hear, not very far from hence, 
some woeful wight lamenting his mischance: 
I'll go and see if that I can espy
him where he sits, or overhear his talk.
o Millaine, Millaine, little dost thou think 
how that thy duke is now in such distress; 
for if thou didst, I soon should be released 
forth of this greedy gulf of misery. 
the Millaine duke: I thought as much before,
when first I glanced mine eyes upon his face.
This is the man which was the only cause 
that I was forced to fly from Arragon:
high love be praised, which hath allotted me
so fit a time to quite that injury. -- 
Pilgrim, god speed.  welcome, grave sir to me. 
me thought as now I heard you for to speak 
of Millaine land: pray do you know the same?
Ay, aged father, I have cause to know
both Millaine land and all the parts thereof. 
why then, I doubt not but you can resolve
me of a question, that I shall demand.
Ay, that I can, what ever that it be. 
then to be brief: not twenty winters past, 
when these my limbs, which withered are with age, 
were in the prime and spring of all their youth,
I still desirous, as young gallants be,
to see the fashions of arabia, 
my native soil, and in this pilgrims weed, 
began to travel through unkenned lands. 
Much ground I passed, and many soils I saw; 
but when my feet in millain land I set, 
such sumptuous triumphs daily there I saw 
as never in my life I found the like.
O pray, good sir, what might the occasion be 
that made the millains make such mirth and glee?
this solemn joy whereof you now do speak 
for at that time there came into the land 
the happiest tidings that they e'er did hear; 
for news was brought upon that solemn day 
unto our court, that ferdinandus proud
was slain himself, and carinus and his son 
were banished both for ever from Arragon: 
and for these happy news that joy was made.
but what, I pray, did afterward become
of old carinus with his banished son?
What, hear you nothing of them all this while? 
yes, too too much, the millain duke may say. 
Alphonsus first by secret means did get
to be a soldier in Belinus wars,
wherein he did behave himself so well 
as that he got the crown of Arragon;
which being got, he dispossessed also 
the king Belinus which had fostered him. 
As for carinus, he is dead and gone:
I would his son were his companion.
a blister build upon that traitor's tongue: 
but, for thy friendship which thou showest me, 
take that of me, I frankly give it thee. 
Now will I haste to Naples with all speed, 
to see if fortune will so favor me 
to view Alphonsus in his happy state. 
Fabius, come hither: what is that thou sayest? 
What did god mahound prophecy to us? 
Why did our viceroys wend unto the wars
before their king had notice of the same? 
What, do they think to play bob fool with me?
Or are they waxed so frolic now of late, 
since that they had the leading of our bands, 
as that they think that mighty Amurack
dares do no other then to soothe them up?
Why speakest thou not? What fond or frantic fit 
did make those careless kings to venture it? 
pardon, dear lord; no frantic fit at all, 
no frolic vain, nor no presumptuous mind 
did make your viceroys take these wars in hand;
but forced they were by mahound's prophecy
to do the same, or else resolve to die. 
so sir, I hear you, but can scarce believe 
that mahound would charge them go before,
against Alphonsus, with so small a troop, 
whose number far exceeds king xerxes' troop.
Fa, yes, noble lord, and more then that, he said 
that, ere that you, with these your warlike men,
should come to bring your succor to the field, 
Belinus, claramount, and arcastus too 
should all be crowned with crowns of beaten gold, 
and born with triumphs round about their tents 
with triumph, man? Did mahound tell them so? 
Provost, go carry Fabius presently 
unto the marshalsea: there let him rest, 
clapped sure and safe in fetters all of steel,
till Amurack discharge him from the same; 
for be he sure, unless it happen so
as he did say, mahound did prophesy, 
by this my hand, forthwith the slave shall die. 
stay, provost stay, let Fabius alone:
more fitteth now that every lusty lad 
be buckling on his helmet, then to stand
in carrying soldiers to the marshalsea. 
why, what art thou that darest once presume 
for to gainsay that Amurack did bid?
I am, my lord, the wretchedest man alive, 
born underneath the planet of mishap; 
erewhile a soldier of Belinus band,
but now -  what now?  the mirror of mishap;
whose captain is slain, and all his army dead, 
only excepted me, unhappy wretch. 
what news is this? And is Belinus slain? 
Is this the crown which Mahomet did say
he should with triumph wear upon his head? 
Is this the honor which that cursed god 
did prophesy should happen to them all? 
O daedalus, and were't thou now alive
to fasten wings upon high Amurack,
mahound should know, and that for certainty, 
that turkish kings can brook no injury.
tush, tush, my lord; I wonder what you mean, 
thus to exclaim against high Mahomet. 
I'll lay my life that, ere this day be past, 
you shall perceive these tidings all be waste. 
we shall perceive, accursed Fabius?
Suffice it not that thou hast been the man
that first didst beat those bables in my brain, 
but that, to help me forward in my grief, 
thou seekest to confirm so foul a lie? 
Go get thee hence, and tell thy traitorous king 
what gift you had, which did such tidings bring.- 
And now, my lords, since nothing else will serve, 
buckle your helms, clap on your steeled coats.
Mount on your steeds, take launces in your hands; 
for Amurack doth mean this very day 
proud Mahomet with weapons to assay.
mercy high monarch: it is no time now
to spend the day in such vain threat'nings 
against our god, the mighty Mahomet. 
More fitteth thee to place thy men at arms 
in battle ray, for to withstand your foes, 
which now are drawing towards you with speed. 
Hark, how their drums with dub a dub do come! 
To arms, high lord, and set these trifles by, 
that you may set upon them valiantly.
and do they come? You kings of turkey land
now is the time in which your warlike arms 
must raise your names above the starry skies: 
call to your mind your predecessors acts,
whose martial might, this many a hundred year,
did keep those fearful dogs in dread and awe,
and let your weapons shew Alphonsus plain, 
that though that they be clapped up in clay, 
yet there be branches sprung up from these trees, 
in turkish land, which brook no injuries. 
Besides the same, remember with yourselves, 
what foes we have; not mighty tamberlain, 
nor soldiers trained up amongst the wars, 
but fearful boors, picked from their rural flock,
which, till this time, were wholly ignorant
what weapons meant, or bloody mars doth crave.
More would I say, but horses that be free 
do need no spurs; and soldiers which themselves
long and desire to buckle with the foe, 
do need no words to egg them to the same, 
besides the same, behold whereas our foes 
are marching towards us most speedily. 
Courage, my lords, ours is the victory. 
thou pagan dog, how dar'st thou be so bold
to set thy foot within Alphonsus' land? 
What, art thou come to view thy wretched kings,
whose traitorous heads bedeck my tent so well? 
Or else, thou hearing that on top thereof
there is a place left vacant, art thou come
to have thy head possess the highest seat?
If it be so, lie down, and this my sword 
if not, pack hence, or by the heavens I vow, 
both thou and thine shall very soon perceive 
that he that seeks to move my patience 
must yield his life to me for recompense. 
why, proud Alphonsus, thinkst thou Amurack,
whose mighty force doth terrify the gods, 
can e'er be found to turn his heels, and fly 
away for fear from such a boy as thou?
No, no, although that mars this mickle while
hath fortified thy weak and feeble army,
and fortune oft hath viewed with friendly face
thy army's marching victors from the field, 
yet at the presence of high Amurack
fortune shall change, and mars, that god of might,
shall succor me, and leave Alphonsus quite. 
pagan I say, thou greatly art deceived:
I clap up fortune in a cage of gold, 
to make her turn her wheel as I think best; 
and as for mars whom you do say will change,
he moping sits behind the kitchen door, 
pressed at command of every scullion's mouth, 
who dares not stir, nor once to move a whit,
for fear Alphonsus then should stomach it. 
blasphemous dog, I wonder that the earth 
doth cease from renting underneath thy feet, 
to swallow up that cankered corpse of thine. 
I muse that love can bridle so his ire
as, when he hears his brother so misused,
he can refrain from sending thunderbolts
by thick and threefold, to revenge his wrong. 
Mars fight for me, and fortune be my guide:
and I'll be victor, what some e'er betide. 
pray loud enough, lest that you pray in vain:
perhaps god mars and fortune are asleep. 
and mars lies slumbering on his downy bed, 
yet do not think but that the power we have, 
without the help of those celestial gods,
will be sufficient, yea, with small ado, 
Alphonsus' straggling army to subdue.
you had need as then to call for Mahomet, 
with hellish hags for to perform the same. 
high Amurack, I wonder what you mean,
that when you may with little toil or none 
compel these dogs to keep their tongues in peace,
you let them stand still barking in this sort: 
believe me, sovereign, I do blush to see 
these beggars' brats to chat so frolicly. 
how now sir boy? Let Amurack himself,
or any he, the proudest of you all, 
but offer once for to unsheath his sword,
if that he dares, for all the power you have.
what dar'st thou us? Myself will venter it. 
fierce is the fight, and bloody is the broil;
no sooner had the roaring cannon shot,
spit forth the venom of their fired paunch, 
and with their pellets sent such troops of souls 
down to the bottom of the dark avern, 
as that it covered all the stygian fields; 
but, on a sudden, all the men at arms,
which mounted were on lusty coursers' backs,
did rush together with so great a noise
as that I thought the giants one time more
did scale the heavens, as erst they did before. 
Long time dame fortune tempered so her wheel 
as that there was no vantage to be seen 
on any side, but equal was the gain. 
But at the length, so god and fates decreed, 
Alphonsus was the victor of the field,
and Amurack became his prisoner;
who so remained until his daughter came,
and by her marrying did his pardon frame. 
you turkish kings, what sudden flight is this? 
What means the men, which for their valiant prowess
were dreaded erst clean through the triple world, 
thus cowardly to turn their backs and fly? 
What froward fortune happened on your side? 
I hope your king in safety doth abide?
Ay, noble madam, Amurack doth live, 
and long I hope he shall enjoy his life; 
but yet I fear, unless more succor come, 
we shall both lose our king and sovereign.
how so, king crocon? Dost thou speak in jest, 
to prove if Fausta would lament his death? 
Or else hath any thing happed him aims?
Speak quickly crocon, what the cause might be,
that thou dost utter forth these words to me.
then, worthy Fausta know that Amurack,
our mighty king, and your approved spouse, 
pricked with desire of everlasting fame, 
as he was pressing in the thickest ranks
of aragonians, was, with much ado, 
at length took prisoner by Alphonsus' hands,
so that, unless you succor soon do bring,
you lose your spouse, and we shall want our king. 
o hapless hap, o dire and cruel fate!
What injury hath Amurack, my sire, 
done to the gods, which now I know are wrath?
Although unjustly and without a cause. 
For well I wot, not any other king, 
which now doth live, or since the world begun
did sway a sceptre, had a greater care 
to please the gods, then mighty Amurack: 
and for to quite our father's great good will, 
steel they thus basely all his fame to spill? 
Iphigina, leave off these woeful tunes: 
it is not words can cure and ease this wound,
but warlike swords; not tears, but sturdy spears, 
high Amurack is prisoner to our foes:
what then? Think you that our amazons, 
joined with the forces of the turkish troop, 
are not sufficient for to set him free? 
Yes, daughter, yes, I mean not for to sleep 
until he is free, or we him company keep.- 
how now Alphonsus! You which never yet 
could meet your equal in the feats of arms, 
how haps it now that in such sudden sort 
you fly the presence of a silly maid? 
What, have you found mine army of such a force 
as that you think your body overweak 
for to withstand the fury of my blows? 
Or do you else disdain to fight with me.
For staining of your high nobility?
no, dainty dame, I would not have thee think 
that ever thou or any other wight 
shall live to see Alphonsus fly the field 
from any king or keiser who some ere: 
first will I die in thickest of my fo, 
before I will disbase mine honor so.
Nor do I scorn, thou goddess, for to stain 
my prowess with thee, although it be a shame 
for knights to combat with the female sect: 
but love, sweet mouse, hath so benumbed my wit, 
that, though I would, I must refrain from it. 
I thought as much when first I came to wars; 
your noble acts were fitter to be writ
within the tables of dame Venus' son 
then in god mars his warlike registers: 
when as your lords are hacking helms abroad, 
and make their spears to shiver in the air,
your mind is busied in fond cupid's toys.
Come on, i'faith, I'll teach you for to know,
we came to fight, and not to love, I know. 
nay, virgin stay. And if thou wilt vouchsafe
to entertain Alphonsus' simple suit, 
thou shalt ere long be monarch of the world: 
all christ'ned kings, with all your pagan dogs
shall bend their knees unto Iphigina. 
The indian soil shall be thine at command, 
where every step thou settest on the ground 
shall be received on the golden mines; 
rich pactolus, that river of account, 
which doth descend from top of tmolu's mount, 
shall be thine own, and all the world beside,
if you will grant to be Alphonsus bride. 
Alphonsus bride? Nay, villain, do not think 
that fame or riches can so rule my thoughts, 
as for to make me love and fancy him 
whom I do hate, and in such sort despise, 
as, if my death could bring to pass his bane,
I would not long from pluto's port remain. 
nay then, proud peacock, thence thou art so stout 
as that entreaty will not move thy mind 
for to consent to be my wedded spouse, 
thou shalt, in spite of gods and fortune too,
serve high Alphonsus as a concubine.
I'll rather die then ever that shall hap.
and thou shalt die unless it come to pas. 
nay Amurack, this is no time to jar, 
although thy wife did, in her frantic mood, 
use speeches which might better have been spared, 
yet do thou not judge this same time to be 
a season to requite that injury.
More fitteth thee, with all the wit thou hast, 
to call to mind which way thou mayest release
thyself, thy wife, and fair Iphigina, 
forth of the power of stout Alphonsus hands;
for, well I wot, since first you breathed breath, 
you never were so nigh the snares of death.
Now Amurack, your high and kingly seat, 
your royal sceptre and your stately crown, 
your mighty country, and your men at arms,
be conquered all, and can no succor bring. 
Put then no trust in these same paltry toys, 
but call to mind that thou a prisoner art,
clapped up in chains; whose life and death depend
upon the hands of thy most mortal foe.
Then take thou heed, that what some e'er he say, 
thou doest not once presume for to gainsay. 
away you fool! Think you your cursed charms 
can bridle so the mind of Amurack 
as that he will stand croaching to his foe? 
No, no, be sure that, if that beggar's brat 
do dare but once to contrary my will, 
I'll make him soon in heart for to repent
that ere such words gainst Amurack he spent. 
then, since thou dost disdain my good advice, 
look to thyself, and if you far aims, 
remember that medea counsel gave
which might you safe from all those perils save.
But Fausta, you, as well you have begun, 
beware you follow still your friend's advice:
if that Alphonsus do desire of thee 
to have your daughter for his wedded spouse,
beware you do not once the same gainsay, 
unless with death he do your rashness pay. 
no, worthy wight; first Fausta means to die 
before Alphonsus she will contrary.
why, then, farewell. -- But you, Iphigina, 
beware you do not oversqueamish wax, 
when as your mother giveth her consent.
the gods forbid that e'er I should gainsay
that which medea bids me to obey. 
now Amurack, the proud blasphemous dogs, 
for so you termed us, which did brawl and rail 
against god mars and fickle fortunes wheel, 
have got the goal for all your solemn prayers. 
Yourself are prisoner, which as then did think 
that all the forces of the triple world
were insufficient to fulfill the same.
How like you this? Is fortune of such might,
or hath god mars such force or power divine,
as that he can, with all the power he hath, 
set thee and thine forth of Alphonsus hands?
I do not think but that your hopes so small 
as that you would with very willing mind
yield for my spouse the fair Iphigina, 
on that condition, that without delay
Fausta and you may scot-free scape away. 
what, thinkst thou, villain, that high Amurack 
bears such a mind as, for the fear of death, 
he'll yield his daughter, yea, his only joy,
into the hands of such a dunghill knight? 
No traitor, no; for though as now I lie 
clapped up in irons and with bolts of steel, 
O yet do there lurk within the turkish soil 
such troops of soldiers, that, with small ado, 
they'll set me scot-free from your men and you.
villain, sayest thou? Traitor and dunghill knight?
Now, by the heavens, since that thou dost deny 
for to fulfill that which in gentle wise 
Alphonsus craves, both thou and all thy train 
shall with your lives requite that injury. 
Albinius, lay hold of Amurack, 
and carry him to prison presently, 
there to remain until I do return
into my tent; for by high love I vow,
unless he wax more calmer out of hand, 
his head amongst his fellow kings shall stand. 
no villain, think not that the fear of death 
shall make me calmer while I draw my breath, 
now laelius, take you Iphigina,
her mother Fausta, with these other kings, 
and put them into prison severely; 
for Amurack's stout stomach shall undo
both he himself and all his other crew. 
o sacred prince, if that the salt-brine tears, 
distilling down poor Fausta's withered cheeks, 
can mollify the hardness of your heart,
lessen this judgment, which thou in thy rage
hast given on thy luckless prisoners. 
woman away! My word is gone and past; 
now, if I would, I cannot call it back. 
You might have yielded at my first demand, 
and then you needed not to fear this hap. 
Laelius, make haste, and go thou presently 
for to fulfill that I commanded thee.
mighty Alphonsus, since my mother's suit
is so rejected that in any case
you will not grant us pardon for her sake,
I now will try if that my woeful prayers 
may plead for pity at your graces feet.
When first you did, amongest the thickest ranks, 
all clad in glittering arms encounter me, 
you know yourself what love you did protest
you then did bear unto Iphigina:
then for that love, if any love you had,
revoke this sentence, which is too too bad. 
no damsel; he that will not when he may, 
when he desires, shall surely purchase nay: 
if that you had, when first I proffer made,
yielded to me, mark, what I promised you, 
I would have done; but since you did deny, 
look for denial at Alphonsus' hands. 
o friendly fortune, now thou showest thy power
in raising up my son, from banished state 
unto the top of thy most mighty wheel: 
but, what be these, which at his sacred feet
do seem to plead for mercy at his hands? 
I'll go sift this matter to the full. 
Sir knight, and may a pilgrim be so bold 
to put your person to such mickle pain
for to inform me what great king is this, 
and what these be, which, in such woeful sort, 
do seem to seek for mercy at his hands? 
pilgrim, the king that sits on stately throne 
is called Alphonsus; and this matron hight 
Fausta, the wife to Amurack the turk;
that is their daughter, fair Iphigina; 
both which, together with the turk himself, 
he did take prisoners in a battle fought. 
and can the gods be found so kind to me 
as that carinus now I do espy? 
'tis he indeed. Come on, albinius:
the mighty conquest which I have achieved,
and victories the which I oft have won, 
bring not such pleasure to Alphonsus' heart
as now my father's presence doth impart.
what, ne'er a word, Alphonsus? Art thou dumb? 
Or doth my presence so perturb thy mind 
that, for because I come in pilgrim's weed, 
you think each word which you do spend to me 
a great disgrace unto your name to be?
Why speakest thou not? If that my place you crave, 
I will be gone, and you my place shall have.
nay, father, stay, the gods of heaven forbid
that e'er Alphonsus should desire or wish 
to have his absence whom he doth account 
to be the guiding loadstone of his life.
What, though the fates and fortune, both in one, 
have been content to call your loving son
from beggar's state, unto this princely seat,
should I therefore disdain my aged sire? 
No. First both crown and life I will detest,
before such venom breed within my breast, 
what erst I did, the sudden joy I took
to see carinus in such happy state, 
did make me do, and nothing else at all, 
high love himself do I to witness call. 
these words are vain; I knew as much before. 
But yet Alphonsus, I must wonder needs
that you, whose years are prone to cupid's snares,
can suffer such a goddess as this dame
thus for to shed such store of crystal tears. 
Believe me son, although my years be spent,
her sighs and sobs in twain my heart do rent. 
like power, dear father, had she over me, 
until for love I looking to receive 
love back again, not only was denied, 
but also taunted in most spiteful sort: 
which made me loathe that which I erst did love,
as she herself, with all her friends, shall prove. 
how now Alphonsus? You which have so long 
been trained up in bloody broils of mars, 
what, know you not that castles are not won
at first assault, and woman are not wooed 
when first their suitors proffer love to them? 
As for my part, I should account that maid 
a wanton wench, unconstant, lewd and light, 
that yields the field before she venture fight; 
especially unto her mortal foe, 
as you were then unto Iphigina. 
But, for because I see you fitter are 
to enter lists and combat with your foes 
then court fair ladies in god cupid's tents,
carinus means your spokesman for to be, 
and if that she consent, you shall agree. 
what you command, Alphonsus must not fly,
though otherwise perhaps he would deny. 
then, dainty damsel, stint these trickling tears, 
cease sighs and sobs, yea, make a merry cheer: 
your pardon is already purchased, 
so that you be not over curious
in granting to Alphonsus' just demand.
thanks, mighty prince: no curiouser I'll be
than doth become a maid of my degree, 
the gods forbid that e'er carinus' tongue 
should go about to make a made consent 
unto the thing which modesty denies.
That which I ask is neither hurt to thee, 
danger to parents, nor disgrace to friends, 
but good and honest, and will profit bring
to thee and those which lean unto that thing. 
And that is this: since first Alphonsus' eyes
did hap to glance upon your heavenly hue, 
and saw the rare perfection of the same, 
he hath desired to become your spouse:
now, if you will into the same agree,
I dare assure you that you shall be free, 
pardon dear lord; the world goes very hard 
when womenkind are forced for to woo; 
if that your son had loved me so well, 
why did he not inform me of the same? 
why, did he not? What, have you clean forgot
what ample proffers he did make to you 
when hand to hand, he did encounter you? 
no, worthy sir, I have not it forgot; 
but cupid cannot enter in the breast 
where mars before had took possession. 
That was no time to talk of Venus' games
when all our fellows were pressed in the wars. 
well, let that pass; now canst thou be content 
to love Alphonsus, and become his spouse? 
Ay, if the high Alphonsus could vouchsafe
to entertain me as his wedded spouse.
if that he could? What, dost thou doubt of that? 
Jason did jest when as he had obtained
the golden fleece of wife medea's art; 
the greeks rejoiced when they had subdued
the famous bulwarks of most stately troy; 
but all their mirth was nothing in respect 
of this my joy, since that I now have got 
that which I long desired in my heart. 
but what says Fausta to her daughter's choice? 
Fausta doth say, the gods have been her friends, 
to let her live to see Iphigina
bestowed so unto her heart's content. 
thanks, mighty empress, for your gentleness; 
and, if Alphonsus can at any time
with all his power requite this courtesy, 
you shall perceive how kindly he doth take
your forwardness in this his happy chance. 
albinius, go call forth Amurack:
we'll see what he doth say unto this match. 
Most mighty turk, I, with my warlike son 
Alphonsus, loathing that so great a prince 
as you should live in such unseemly sort, 
have sent for you to proffer life or death; 
life, if you do consent to our demand, 
and death, if that you dare gainsay the same.
Your wife, high Fausta, with Iphigina, 
have given consent that this my warlike son
should have your daughter for his bedfellow: 
now resteth nought but that you do agree, 
and so to purchase sure tranquility.
now Amurack, advise thee what thou sayest;
bethink thee well what answer thou wilt make: 
thy life and death dependeth on thy words.
If thou deny to be Alphonsus' sire,
death is thy share; but if that thou consent,
thy life is saved. Consent? Nay, rather die: 
should I consent to give Iphigina 
into the hands of such a beggar's brat? 
What, Amurack, thou dost deceive thyself;
Alphonsus is the son unto a king: 
what then? Then worthy of thy daughter's love, 
she is agreed, and Fausta is content; 
then Amurack will not be discontent. 
Here, brave Alphonsus, take thou at my hand
Iphigina, I give her unto thee; 
and for her dowry, when her father dies, 
thou shalt possess the turkish empery. 
Take her, I say, and live king nestor's years: 
so would the turk and all his noble peers.
Alphon, immortal thanks I give unto your grace. 
now, worthy princes, since by help of love 
on either side the wedding is decreed,
come, let us wend to Naples speedily
for to solemnize it with mirth and glee. 
as you do will, we jointly do agree. 
now worthy muses, with unwilling mind 
Venus is forced to trudge to heavens again:
for jupiter, that god of peerless power, 
proclaimed hath a solemn festival 
in honor of dame danae's luckless death; 
unto the which, in pain of his displeasure, 
he hath invited all the immortal gods
and goddesses, so that I must be there,
unless I will his high displeasure bear.
You see Alphonsus hath with much ado, 
at length obtained fair Iphigina,
of Amurack her father, for his wife; 
who now are going to the temple wards,
for to perform dame juno's sacred rites;
where we will leave them, till the feast be done;
which, in the heavens, by this time is begun.
Mean time, dear muses, wander you not far 
forth of the path of high pernassus hill, 
that, when I come to finish up his life, 
you may be ready for to succor me:
adieu, dear dames; farewell, calliope,
adieu, you sacred goddess of the sky. 
Well, loving sisters, since that she is gone, 
come, let us haste unto pernassus hill, 
as cytherea did us lately will. 
then make you haste her mind for to fulfill. 

<FBFBST>
Why looks my lord like to a troubled sky
When heaven's bright shine is shadowed with a fog?
Alate we ran the deer, and through the lawns
Stripped with our nags the lofty frolic bucks
That scudded 'fore the teasers like the wind.
Ne'er was the deer of merry Fressingfield
So lustily pulled down by jolly mates,
Nor shared the farmers such fat venison,
So frankly dealt, this hundred years before;
Nor have I seen my lord more frolic in the chase,
And now changed to a melancholy dump.
After the Prince got to the keeper's lodge
And had been jocund in the house a while,
Tossing of ale and milk in country cans,
Whether it was the country's sweet content,
Or else the bonny damsel filled us drink,
That seemed so stately in her stammel red,
Or that a qualm did cross his stomach then,
But straight he fell into his passions.
Sirrah Rafe, what say you to your master,
Shall he thus all amort live malcontent?
I tell thee, Lacy, that her sparkling eyes
Do lighten forth sweet love's alluring fire;
And in her tresses she doth fold the looks
Of such as gaze upon her golden hair;
Her bashful white mixed with the morning's red
Luna doth boast upon her lovely cheeks;
Her front is beauty's table, where she paints
The glories of her gorgeous excellence;
Her teeth are shelves of precious margarites
Richly enclosed with ruddy coral cleeves.
Tush, Lacy, she is beauty's over- match,
If thou survey'st her curious imagery.
I grant, my lord, the damsel is as fair
As simple Suffolk's homely towns can yield;
But in the court be quainter dames than she,
Whose faces are enriched with honor's taint,
Whose beauties stand upon the stage of fame
And vaunt their trophies in the courts of Love.
Ah, Ned, but hadst thou watched her as myself,
And seen the secret beauties of the maid,
Their courtly coyness were but foolery.
Why, how watched you her, my lord?
When as she swept like Venus through the house,
And in her shape fast folded up my thoughts,
Into the milkhouse went I with the maid,
And there amongst the cream bowls she did shine
As Pallas 'mongst her princely huswifery.
She turned her smock over her lily arms
And dived them into milk to run her cheese;
But, whiter than the milk, her crystal skin,
Checked with lines of azure, made her blush,
That art or nature durst bring for compare.
Ermsby, if thou hadst seen as I did note it well,
How beauty played the huswife, how this girl,
Like Lucrece, laid her fingers to the work,
Thou wouldest with Tarquin hazard Rome and all
To win the lovely maid of Fressingfield.
Lacy, the fool hath laid a perfect plot;
For why our country Margaret is so coy
And stands so much upon her honest points,
That marriage or no market with the maid,
Ermsby, it must be necromantic spells
And charms of art that must enchain her love,
Or else shall Edward never win the girl.
Therefore, my wags, we'll horse us in the morn,
And post to Oxford to this jolly friar.
Bacon shall by his magic do this deed.
Content, my lord; and that's a speedy way
To wean these headstrong puppies from the teat.
I am unknown, not taken for the prince;
They only deem us frolic courtiers
That revel thus among our liege's game;
Therefore I have devised a policy.
Lacy, thou know'st next Friday is Saint James',
And then the country flocks to Harleston fair;
Then will the keeper's daughter frolic there,
And over-shine the troop of all the maids
That come to see and to be seen that day.
Haunt thee disguised among the country swains;
Feign th' art a farmer's son not far from thence;
Espy her loves, and who she liketh best;
Cote him, and court her to control the clown.
Say that the courtier 'tired all in green,
That helped her handsomely to run her cheese
And filled her father's lodge with venison,
Commends him, and sends fairings to herself.
Buy something worthy of her parentage,
Not worth her beauty, for, Lacy, then the fair
Affords no jewel fitting for the main.
And when thou talkest of me, note if she blush;
Oh, then she loves; but if her cheeks wax pale,
Disdain it is. Lacy, send how she fares,
And spare no time nor cost to win her loves.
I will, my lord, so execute this charge
As if that Lacy were in love with her.
Send letters speedily to Oxford of the news.
Well, Lacy, look with care unto thy charge,
And I will haste to Oxford to the friar,
That he by art, and thou by secret gifts,
Mayst make me lord of merry Fressingfield.

Now, masters of our academic state,
That rule in Oxford, viceroys in your place,
Whose heads contain maps of the liberal arts,
Spending your time in depth of learned skill,
Why flock you thus to Bacon's secret cell,
A friar newly stalled in Brazen-nose?
Say what's your mind, that I may make reply.
Bacon, we hear that long we have suspect,
That thou art read in magic's mystery;
In pyromancy to divine by flames;
To tell by hydromantic ebbs and tides;
By aeromancy to discover doubts,
To plain out questions, as Apollo did.
I tell thee, Bacon, Oxford makes report,
Nay, England, and the court of Henry says
Th' art making of a brazen head by art
Which shall unfold strange doubts and aphorisms
And read a lecture in philosophy,
And by the help of devils and ghastly fiends,
Thou mean'st, ere many years or days be past,
To compass England with a wall of brass.
Bacon, we come not grieving at thy skill,
But joying that our academy yields
A man supposed the wonder of the world;
For if thy cunning work these miracles,
England and Europe shall admire thy fame,
And Oxford shall in characters of brass
And statues such as were built up in Rome
Eternize Friar Bacon for his art.
Then, gentle friar, tell us thy intent.
Seeing you come as friends unto the friar,
Resolve you, doctors, Bacon can by books
Make storming Boreas thunder from his cave
And dim fair Luna to a dark eclipse.
The great arch-ruler, potentate of hell,
Trembles, when Bacon bids him or his fiends
Bow to the force of his pentageron.
What art can work, the frolic friar knows;
And therefore will I turn my magic books
And strain out necromancy to the deep.
I have contrived and framed a head of brass
(I made Belcephon hammer out the stuff),
And that by art shall read philosophy;
And I will strengthen England by my skill,
That if ten Caesars lived and reigned in Rome,
With all the legions Europe doth contain,
They whould not touch a grass of English ground.
The work that Ninus reared at Babylon,
The brazen walls framed by Semiramis,
Carved out like to the portal of the sun,
Shall not be such as rings the English strand
From Dover to the market place of Rye.
No doubt but magic may do much in this,
For he that reads but mathematic rules
Shall find conclusions that avail to work
Wonders that pass the common sense of men.
But Bacon roves a bow beyond his reach,
And tells of more than magic can perform,
Thinking to get a fame by fooleries.
Have I not passed as far in state of schools,
And read of many secrets? Yet to think
That heads of brass can utter any voice,
Or more, to tell of deep philosophy --
This is a fable Aesop had forgot.
Burden, thou wrong'st me in detracting thus;
Bacon loves not to stuff himself with lies.
But tell me 'fore these doctors, if thou dare,
Of certain questions I shall move to thee.
Masters, for that learned Burden's skill is deep,
And sore he doubts of Bacon's cabalism,
I'll show you why he haunts to Henley oft:
Not, doctors, for to taste the fragrant air,
But there to spend the night in alchemy,
To multiply with secret spells of art.
Thus private steals he learning from us all.
To prove my sayings true, I'll show you straight
The book he keeps at Henley for himself.
Nay, now my master goes to conjuration,
take heed. Masters, stand still; fear not. I'll show
you but his book.
Per omnes deos infernales, Belcephon.
As I was in the kitchen 'mongst the maids,
Spitting the meat against supper for my guess,
A motion moved me to look forth of door.
No sooner had I pried into the yard,
But straight a whirlwind hoisted me from thence
And mounted me aloft unto the clouds.
As in a trance, I thought nor feared naught,
Nor know I where or whither I was ta'en,
Nor where I am, nor what these persons be.
No? Know you not Master Burden?
Oh, yes, good sir, he is my daily guest.
What, Master Burden, 'twas but yesternight
That you and I at Henley played at cards.
I know not what we did; a pox of all conjuring friars!
Now, jolly friar, tell us, is this the book
That Burden is so careful to look on?
It is; but, Burden, tell me now,
Thinkest thou that Bacon's necromantic skill
Cannot perform his head and wall of brass,
When he can fetch thine hostess in such post?
I'll warrant you, master, if Master Burden
could conjure as well as you, he would have his
book every night from Henley to study on at Oxford.
Burden, what, are you mated by this frolic friar?
Look how he droops; his guilty conscience
Drives him to bash and makes his hostess blush.
Well, mistress, for I will not have you missed,
You shall to Henley to cheer up your guests
'Fore supper 'gin. Burden, bid her adieu,
Say farewell to your hostess 'fore she goes.
Sirrah, away, and set her safe at home.
Master Burden, when shall we see you at Henley?
Thus, rulers of our academic state,
You have seen the friar frame his art by proof;
And as the college called Brazen-nose
Is under him, and he the master there,
So surely shall this head of brass be framed,
And yield forth strange and uncouth aphorisms;
And hell and Hecate shall fail the friar,
But I will circle England round with brass.
So be it, et nunc et semper. Amen.
Thomas, maids, when they come to see the fair
Count not to make a cope for dearth of hay.
When we have turned our butter to the salt,
And set our cheese safely upon the racks,
Then let our fathers price it as they please.
We country sluts of merry Fressingfield
Come to buy needless naughts to make us fine,
And look that young men should be frank this day,
And court us with such fairings as they can.
Phoebus is blithe, and frolic looks from heaven
as when he courted lovely Semele,
swearing the pedlars shall have empty packs,
If that fair weather may make chapmen buy.
But, lovely Peggy, Semele is dead,
And therefore Phoebus from his palace pries,
And, seeing such a sweet and seemly saint,
Shows all his glories for to court yourself.
This is a fairing, gentle sir, indeed,
To soothe me up with such smooth flattery;
But learn of me, your scoff's too broad before.
Well, Joan, our beauties must abide their jests;
We serve the turn in jolly Fressingfield.
Margaret, a farmer's daughter for a farmer's son.
I warrant you the meanest of us both
Shall have a mate to lead us from the church.
But, Thomas, what's the news? What, in a dump?
Give me your hand, we are near a pedlar's shop;
Out with your purse; we must have fairings now.
Whence are you, sir? Of Suffolk? For your terms
Are finer than the common sort of men.
Faith, lovely girl, I am of Beccles by,
Your neighbor not above six miles from hence,
A farmer's son that never was so quaint
But that he could do courtesy to such dames.
But trust me, Margaret, I am sent in charge
From him that reveled in your father's house,
And filled his lodge with cheer and venison,
'Tired in green. He sent you this rich purse,
His token that he helped you run your cheese,
And in the milkhouse chatted with yourself.
To me? You forget yourself.
Women are often weak in memory.
Oh, pardon, sir, I call to mind the man.
'Twere little manners to refuse his gift,
And yet I hope he sends it not for love;
For we have little leisure to debate of that.
What, Margaret, blush not; maids must have their loves.
How different is this farmer from the rest
That erst as yet hath pleased my wand'ring sight.
His words are witty, quickened with a smile,
His courtesy gentle, smelling of the court;
Facile and debonair in all his deeds.
Proportioned as was Paris, when, in gray,
He courted Aenon in the vale by Troy.
Great lords have come and pleaded for my love. . .
Who but the keeper's lass of Fressingfield?
And yet methinks this farmer's jolly son
Passeth the proudest that hath pleased mine eye.
But, Peg, disclose not that thou art in love,
And show as yet no sign of love to him,
Although thou well wouldst wish him for thy love;
Keep that to thee, till time doth serve thy turn
To show the grief wherein thy heart doth burn.
Come, Joan and Thomas, shall we to the fair?
You, Beccles man, will not forsake us now?
Not whilst I may have such quaint girls as you.
Well, if you chance to come by Fressingfield,
Make but a step into the keeper's lodge,
And such poor fare as woodmen can afford --
Butter and cheese, cream, and fat venison --
You shall have store, and welcome therewithal.
Gramercies, Peggy; look for me ere long.
Great men of Europe, monarchs of the west,
Ringed with the walls of old Oceanus,
Whose lofty surge is like the battlements
That compassed high-built Babel in with towers,
Welcome, my lords, welcome, brave western kings,
To England's shore, whose promontory cleeves
Shows Albion is another little world.
Welcome says English Henry to you all;
Chiefly unto the lovely Eleanor,
Who dared for Edward's sake cut through the seas,
And venture as Agenor's damsel through the deep,
To get the love of Henry's wanton son.
England's rich monarch, brave Plantagenet,
The Pyren Mounts swelling above the clouds,
That ward the wealthy Castile in with walls,
Could not detain the beauteous Eleanor;
But hearing of the fame of Edward's youth,
She dared to brook Neptunus' haughty pride
And bide the brunt of froward Aeolus.
Then may fair England welcome her the more.
After that English Henry, by his lords,
Had sent Prince Edward's lovely counterfeit,
A present to the Castile Eleanor,
The comely portrait of so brave a man,
The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds,
Edward's courageous resolution
Done at the Holy Land 'fore Damas' walls,
Led both mine eye and thoughts in equal links
To like so of the English monarch's son
That I attempted perils for his sake.
Where is the prince, my lord?
He posted down, not long since, from the court
To Suffolk side, to merry Framingham,
To sport himself amongst my fallow deer;
From thence, by packets sent to Hampton House,
We hear the prince is ridden with his lords
To Oxford, in the academy there
To hear dispute amongst the learned men.
But we will send forth letters for my son,
To will him come from Oxford to the court.
Nay, rather, Henry, let us, as we be,
Ride for to visit Oxford with our train.
Fain would I see your universities
And what learned men your academy yields.
From Hapsburg have I brought a learned clerk
To hold dispute with English orators.
This doctor, surnamed Jacques Vandermast,
A German born, passed into Padua,
To Florence, and to fair Bologna,
To Paris, Rheims, and stately Orleans,
And, talking there with men of art, put down
The chiefest of them all in aphorisms,
In magic, and the mathematic rules.
Now let us, Henry, try him in your schools.
He shall, my lord; this motion likes me well.
We'll progress straight to Oxford with our trains,
And see what men our academy brings.
And, wonder Vandermast, welcome to me;
In Oxford shalt thou find a jolly friar
Called Friar Bacon, England's only flower.
Set him but nonplus in his magic spells,
And make him yield in mathematic rules,
And for thy glory I will bind thy brows
Not with a poet's garland made of bays,
But with a coronet of choicest gold.
Whilst then we fit to Oxford with our troops,
Let's in and banquet in our English court.
Could you not judge when all your swords grew fast
That Friar Bacon was not far from hence?
Edward, King Henry's son, and Prince of Wales,
Thy fool disguised cannot conceal thyself.
I know both Ermsby and the Sussex earl,
Else Friar Bacon had but little skill.
Thou comest in post from merry Fressingfield,
Fast-fancied to the keeper's bonny lass,
To crave some succor of the jolly friar;
And Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, hast thou left
To 'treat fair Margaret to allow thy loves;
But friends are men, and love can baffle lords.
The earl both woos and courts her for himself.
Ned, this is strange; the friar knoweth all.
Apollo could not utter more than this.
I stand amazed to hear this jolly friar
Tell even the very secrets of my thoughts.
But, learned Bacon, since thou knowest the cause
Why I did post so fast from Fressingfield,
Help, friar, at a pinch, that I may have
The love of lovely Margaret to myself,
And, as I am true Prince of Wales, I'll give
Living and lands to strength thy college state.
Good friar, help the prince in this.
Why, servant Ned, will not the friar do it?
What, doctor, in a dump? Tush, help the prince,
And thou shalt see how liberal he will prove.
Crave not such actions greater dumps than these?
I will, my lord, strain out my magic spells;
For this day comes the earl to Fressingfield,
And 'fore that night shuts in the day with dark,
They'll be betrothed each to other fast.
But come with me; we'll to my study straight,
And in a glass prospective I will show
What's done this day in merry Fressingfield.
Gramercies, Bacon; I will quite thy pain.
But send your train, my lord, into the town;
My scholar shall go bring them to their inn.
Meanwhile we'll see the knavery of the earl.
Warren, leave me; and, Ermsby, take the fool;
Let him be master, and go revel it
Till I and Friar Bacon talk awhile.
 
Now, frolic Edward, welcome to my cell.
Here tempers Friar Bacon many toys,
And holds this place his consistory court,
Wherein the devils pleads homage to his words.
Within this glass prospective thou shalt see
This day what's done in merry Fressingfield
'Twixt lovely Peggy and the Lincoln earl.
Friar, thou glad'st me. Now shall Edward try
How Lacy meaneth to his sovereign lord.
Stand there and look directly in the glass.
What sees my lord?
I see the keeper's lovely lass appear
As bright sun as the paramour of Mars,
Only attended by a jolly friar.
Sit still, and keep the crystal in your eye.
But tell me, Friar Bungay, is it true
That this fair courteous country swain,
Who says his father is a farmer nigh,
Can be Lord Lacy, Earl of Lincolnshire?
Peggy, 'tis true, 'tis Lacy, for my life,
Or else mine art and cunning both doth fail,
Left by Prince Edward to procure his loves;
For he in green that holp you run your cheese
Is son to Henry, and the Prince of Wales.
Be what he will, his lure is but for lust.
But did Lord Lacy like poor Margaret,
Or would he deign to wed a country lass,
Friar, I would his humble handmaid be,
And, for great wealth, quite him with courtesy.
Why, Margaret, dost thou love him?
His personage, like the pride of vaunting Troy,
Might well avouch to shadow Helen's scape;
His wit is quick, and ready in conceit,
As Greece afforded in her chiefest prime;
Courteous, ah, friar, full of pleasing smiles.
Trust me, I love too much to tell thee more;
Suffice to me he is England's paramour.
Hath not each eye that viewed thy pleasing face
Surnamed thee Fair Maid of Fressingfield?
Yes, Bungay, and would God the lovely earl
Had that in esse that so many sought.
Fear not, the friar will not be behind
To show his cunning to entangle love.
I think the friar courts the bonny wench.
Bacon, methinks he is a lusty churl.
Now look, my lord.
Sit still, my lord, and mark the comedy.
Here's Lacy. Margaret, step aside awhile.
Daphne, the damsel that caught Phoebus fast,
And locked him in the brightness of her looks,
Was not so beauteous in Apollo's eyes
As is fair Margaret to the Lincoln earl.
Recant thee, Lacy, thou art put in trust.
Edward, thy sovereign's son, hath chosen thee,
A secret friend, to court her for himself,
And darest thou wrong thy prince with treachery?
Lacy, love makes no exception of a friend,
Nor deems it of a prince but as a man.
Honor bids thee control him in his lust;
His wooing is not for to wed the girl.
But to entrap her and beguile the lass.
Lacy, thou lovest; then brook not such abuse,
But wed her, and abide thy prince's frown,
For better die, than see her live disgraced.
Come, friar, I will shake him from his dumps.
How cheer you, sir? A penny for your thought.
You're early up; pray God it be the near.
What, come from Beccles in a morn so soon?
Thus watchful are such men as live in love,
Whose eyes brook broken slumbers for their sleep.
I tell thee, Peggy, since last Harleston fair
My mind hath felt a heap of passions.
A trusty man, that court it for your friend.
Woo you still for the courtier all in green?
I marvel that he sues not for himself.
Peggy, I pleaded first to get your grace for him,
But when mine eyes surveyed your beauteous looks,
Love, like a wag, straight dived into my heart,
And there did shrine the idea of yourself.
Pity me, though I be a farmer's son,
And measure not my riches but my love.
You are very hasty; for to garden well,
Seeds must have time to sprout before they spring;
Love ought to creep as doth the dial's shade,
Fore timely ripe is rotten too too soon.
Deus hic; room for a merry friar.
What, youth of Beccles, with the keeper's lass?
'Tis well. But, tell me, hear you any news?
No, friar. What news?
Hear you not how the pursuivants do post
With proclamations through each country town?
For what, gentle friar? Tell the news.
Dwell'st thou in Beccles and hear'st not of these news?
Lacy, the Earl of Lincoln, is late fled
From Windsor court, disguised like a swain,
And lurks about the country here unknown.
Henry suspects him of some treachery,
And therefore doth proclaim in every way
That who can take the Lincoln earl shall have,
Paid in the Exchequer, twenty thousand crowns.
The Earl of Lincoln! Friar, thou art mad.
It was some other; thou mistakest the man.
The Earl of Lincoln! Why, it cannot be.
Yes, very well, my lord, for you are he.
The keeper's daughter took you prisoner.
Lord Lacy, yield; I'll be your jailer once.
How familiar they be, Bacon.
Sit still, and mark the sequel of their loves.
Then am I double prisoner to thyself.
Peggy, I yield. But are these news in jest?
In jest with you, but earnest unto me;
For why these wrongs do wring me at the heart.
Ah, how these earls and noble men of birth
Flatter and feign to forge poor women's ill.
Believe me, lass, I am the Lincoln earl
I not deny; but 'tired thus in rags
I lived disguised to win fair Peggy's love.
What love is there where wedding ends not love?
I meant, fair girl, to make thee Lacy's wife.
I little think that earls will stoop so low.
Say, shall I make thee countess ere I sleep?
Handmaid unto the earl, so please himself;
A wife in name, but servant in obedience.
The Lincoln countess, for it shall be so.
I'll plight the bands, and seal it with a kiss.
Gog's wounds, Bacon, they kiss! I'll stab them.
Oh, hold your hands, my lord, it is the glass!
Choler to see the traitors 'gree so well
Made me think the shadows substances.
Well, Lord of Lincoln, if your loves be knit,
And that your tongues and thoughts do both agree,
To avoid ensuing jars, I'll hamper up the match.
I'll take my portace forth and wed you here;
Then go to bed and seal up your desires.
Friar, content. Peggy, how like you this?
What likes my lord is pleasing unto me.
Then handfast hand, and I will to my book.
Bacon, I see the lovers hand in hand,
The friar ready with his portace there
To wed them both; then am I quite undone.
Bacon, help now, if e'er thy magic served;
Help, Bacon; stop the marriage now,
If devils or necromancy may suffice,
And I will give thee forty thousand crowns.
Fear not, my lord, I'll stop the jolly friar
For mumbling up his orisons this day.
Why speak'st not, Bungay? Friar, to thy book.
How lookest thou, friar, as a man distraught?
Reft of thy senses, Bungay? Show by signs,
If thou be dumb, what passions holdeth thee.
He's dumb indeed. Bacon hath with his devils
Enchanted him, or else some strange disease
Or apoplexy hath possessed his lungs.
But Peggy, what he cannot with his book,
We'll 'twixt us both unite it up in heart.
Else let me die, my lord, a miscreant.
Why stands Friar Bungay so amazed?
I have struck him dumb, my lord; and if your
honor please,
I'll fetch this Bungay straightway from Fressingfield,
And he shall dine with us in Oxford here.
Bacon, do that and thou contentest me.
Of courtesy, Margaret, let us lead the friar
Unto thy father's lodge, to comfort him
With broths, to bring him from this hapless trance.
Or else, my lord, we were passing unkind
To leave the friar so in his distress.
Oh, help, my lord, a devil! a devil, my lord!
Look how he carries Bungay on his back!
Let's hence, for Bacon's spirits be abroad.
Bacon, I laugh to see the jolly friar
Mounted upon the devil, and how the earl
Flees with his bonny lass for fear.
As soon as Bungay is at Brazen-nose,
And I have chatted with the merry friar,
I will in post hie me to Fressingfield
And quite these wrongs on Lacy ere it be long.
So be it, my lord. But let us to our dinner;
For ere we have taken our repast awhile,
We shall have Bungay brought to Brazen-nose.
Now that we are gathered in the Regent House,
It fits us talk about the king's repair;
For he, trooped with all the western kings
That lie alongst the Danzig seas by east,
North by the clime of frosty Germany,
The Almain monarch, and the Saxon duke,
Castile, and lovely Eleanor with him,
Have in their jests resolved for Oxford town.
We must lay plots of stately tragedies,
Strange comic shows, such as proud Roscius
Vaunted before the Roman emperors,
To welcome all the western potentates.
But more, the king by letters hath foretold
That Frederick, the Almain emperor,
Hath brought with him a German of esteem,
Whose surname is Don Jacques Vandermast,
Skillful in magic and those secret arts.
Then must we all make suit unto the friar,
To Friar Bacon, that he vouch this task,
And undertake to countervail in skill
The German; else there's none in Oxford can
Match and dispute with learned Vandermast.
Bacon, if he will hold the German play,
We'll teach him what an English friar can do.
The devil, I think, dare not dispute with him.
Indeed, Mas Doctor, he pleasured you
In that he brought your hostess with her spit
From Henley, posting unto Brazen-nose.
A vengeance on the friar for his pains;
But, leaving that, let us hie to Bacon straight
To see if he will take this task in hand.
Why, and thinkest thou, doctor, that he is not so?
Dar'st thou detract and derogate from him,
Being so lovely and so brave a youth?
Whose face, shining with many a sugared smile,
Bewrays that he is bred of princely race?
And yet, Master Doctor, to speak like a proctor,
And tell unto you what is veriment and true,
To cease of this quarrel, look but on his apparel;
Then mark but my talis, he is great Prince of Walis,
The chief of our gregis, and filius regis.
Then 'ware what is done, for he is Henry's white son.
And I with scientia and great diligentia
Will conjure and charm to keep you from harm;
That utrum horum mavis, your very great navis,
Like Bartlet's ship, from Oxford do skip,
With colleges and schools full loaden with fools.
Quid dices ad hoc, worshipful domine Dawcock?
Why, hare-brained courtiers, are you drunk or mad,
To taunt us up with such scurrility?
Deem you us men of base and light esteem,
To bring us such a fop for Henry's son?
Call out the beadles and convey them hence,
Straight to Bocardo; let the roisters lie
Close clapped in bolts, until their wits be tame.
No, no; out with your blades, and hamper these jades;
Have a flirt and a crash, now play revel-dash,
And teach these sacerdos that the Bocardos,
Like peasants and elves, are meet for themselves.
To the prison with them, constable.
Well, doctors, seeing I have sported me
With laughing at these mad and merry wags,
Know that Prince Edward is at Brazen-nose,
And this, attired like the Prince of Wales,
Is Rafe, King Henry's only loved fool;
I, Earl of Sussex; and this Ermsby,
One of the privy chamber to the king,
Who, while the prince with Friar Bacon stays,
Have reveled it in Oxford as you see.
My lord, pardon us; we knew not what you were;
But courtiers may make greater scapes than these.
Will't please your honor dine with me today?
Lacy, thou canst not shroud thy trait'rous thoughts,
Nor cover as did Cassius all his wiles;
For Edward hath an eye that looks as far
As Lynceus from the shores of Grecia.
Did not I sit in Oxford by the friar,
And see thee court the maid of Fressingfield,
Sealing thy flattering fancies with a kiss?
Did not proud Bungay draw his portace forth
And, joining hand in hand, had married you,
If Friar Bacon had not stroke him dumb
And mounted him upon a spirit's back,
That we might chat at Oxford with the friar?
Traitor, what answer'st? Is not all this true?
Truth all, my lord, and thus I make reply.
At Harleston Fair, there courting for your grace,
When as mine eye surveyed her curious shape,
And drew the beauteous glory of her looks
To dive into the center of my heart,
Love taught me that your honor did but jest,
That princes were in fancy but as men,
How that the lovely maid of Fressingfield
Was fitter to be Lacy's wedded wife
Than concubine unto the Prince of Wales.
Injurious Lacy, did I love thee more
Than Alexander his Hephestion?
Did I unfold the passion of my love
And lock them in the closet of thy thoughts?
Wert thou to Edward second to himself,
Sole friend, and partner of his secret loves?
And could a glance of fading beauty break
Th' enchained fetters of such private friends?
Base coward, false, and too effeminate
To be corrival with a prince in thoughts!
From Oxford have I posted since I dined
To quite a traitor 'fore that Edward sleep.
'Twas I, my lord, not Lacy stepped awry;
For oft he sued and courted for yourself,
And still wooed for the courtier all in green;
But I, whom fancy made but over fond,
Pleaded myself with looks as if I loved.
I fed mine eye with gazing on his face,
And, still bewitched, loved Lacy with my looks.
My heart with sighs, mine eyes pleaded with tears,
My face held pity and content at once,
And more I could not cipher out by signs
But that I loved Lord Lacy with my heart.
Then, worthy Edward, measure with thy mind
If women's favors will not force men fall,
If beauty and if darts of piercing love
Is not of force to bury thoughts of friends.
I tell thee, Peggy, I will have thy loves.
Edward or none shall conquer Margaret.
In frigates bottomed with rich Sethin planks,
Topped with the lofty firs of Lebanon,
Stemmed and incased with burnished ivory,
And overlaid with plates of Persian wealth,
Like Thetis shalt thou wanton on the waves,
And draw the dolphins to thy lovely eyes,
To dance lavoltas in the purple streams.
Sirens, with harps and silver psalteries,
Shall wait with music at thy frigate's stem
And entertain fair Margaret with their lays.
England and England's wealth shall wait on thee;
Britain shall bend unto her prince's love
And do due homage to thine excellence,
If thou wilt be but Edward's Margaret.
Pardon, my lord. If Jove's great royalty
Sent me such presents as to Danae,
If Phoebus, 'tired in Latona's weeds,
Come courting from the beauty of his lodge,
The dulcet tunes of frolic Mercury,
Not all the wealth heaven's treasury affords,
Should make me leave Lord Lacy or his love.
I have learned at Oxford, then, this point of schools:
Ablata causa, tollitur effectus.
Lacy, the cause that Margaret cannot love
Nor fix her liking on the English prince,
Take him away, and then the effects will fail.
Villain, prepare thyself; for I will bathe
My poniard in the bosom of an earl.
Rather than live and miss fair Margaret's love,
Prince Edward, stop not at the fatal doom,
But stab it home; end both my loves and life.
Brave Prince of Wales, honored for royal deeds,
'Twere sin to stain fair Venus' courts with blood.
Love's conquests ends, my lord, in courtesy;
Spare Lacy, gentle Edward; let me die,
For so both you and he do cease your loves.
Lacy shall die as traitor to his lord.
I have deserved it; Edward, act it well.
What hopes the prince to gain by Lacy's death?
To end the loves 'twixt him and Margaret.
Why, thinks King Henry's son that Margaret's love
Hangs in the uncertain balance of proud time,
That death shall make a discord of our thoughts?
No; stab the earl, and 'fore the morning sun
Shall vaunt him thrice over the lofty east,
Margaret will meet her Lacy in the heavens.
If aught betides to lovely Margaret
That wrongs or wrings her honor from content,
Europe's rich wealth nor England's monarchy
Should not allure Lacy to overlive.
Then, Edward, short my life and end her loves.
Rid me, and keep a friend worth many loves.
Nay, Edward, keep a love worth many friends.
And if thy mind be such as fame hath blazed,
Then, princely Edward, let us both abide
The fatal resolution of thy rage;
Banish thou fancy and embrace revenge,
And in one tomb knit both our carcasses,
Whose hearts were linked in one perfect love.
Edward, art thou that famous Prince of Wales
Who at Damasco beat the Saracens,
And brought'st home triumph on thy lance's point,
And shall thy plumes be pulled by Venus down?
Is it princely to dissever lovers' leagues,
To part such friends as glory in their loves?
Leave, Ned, and make a virtue of this fault,
And further Peg and Lacy in their loves.
So in subduing fancy's passion,
Conquering thyself, thou get'st the richest spoil. --
Lacy, rise up. Fair Peggy, here's my hand.
The Prince of Wales hath conquered all his thoughts,
And all his loves he yields unto the earl.
Lacy, enjoy the maid of Fressingfield;
Make her thy Lincoln countess at the church,
And Ned, as he is true Plantagenet,
Will give her to thee frankly for thy wife.
Humbly I take her of my sovereign,
As if that Edward gave me England's right,
And 'riched me with the Albion diadem.
And doth the English prince mean true?
Will he vouchsafe to cease his former loves,
And yield the title of a country maid
I will, fair Peggy, as I am true lord.
Then, lordly sir, whose conquest is as great,
In conquering love, as Caesar's victories,
Margaret, as mild and humble in her thoughts
As was Aspasia unto Cyrus' self,
Yields thanks, and, next Lord Lacy, doth enshrine
Edward the second secret in her heart.
Gramercy, Peggy. Now that vows are passed,
And that your loves are not to be revolt,
Once, Lacy, friends again, come, we will post
To Oxford; for this day the king is there,
And brings for Edward Castile Eleanor.
Peggy, I must go see and view my wife;
I pray God I like her as I loved thee.
Beside, Lord Lincoln, we shall hear dispute
'Twixt Friar Bacon and learned Vandermast.
Peggy, we'll leave you for a week or two.
As it please Lord Lacy; but love's foolish looks
Think footsteps miles and minutes to be hours.
I'll hasten, Peggy, to make short return.
But, please your honor, go unto the lodge;
We shall have butter, cheese, and venison;
And yesterday I brought for Margaret
A lusty bottle of neat claret wine.
Thus can we feast and entertain your grace.
'Tis cheer, Lord Lacy, for an emperor,
If he respect the person and the place.
Come, let us in; for I will all this night
Ride post until I come to Bacon's cell. 
Trust me, Plantagenet, these Oxford schools
Are richly seated near the river side;
The mountains full of fat and fallow deer,
The battling pastures laid with kine and flocks.
The town gorgeous with high-built colleges,
And scholars seemly in their grave attire,
Learned in searching principles of art.
What is thy judgment, Jacques Vandermast?
That lordly are the buildings of the town,
Spacious the rooms and full of pleasant walks;
But for the doctors, how that they be learned,
It may be meanly, for aught I can hear.
I tell thee, German, Hapsburg holds none such,
None read so deep as Oxenford contains.
There are within our academic state
Men that may lecture it in Germany
To all the doctors of your Belgic schools.
Stand to him, Bungay. Charm this Vandermast,
And I will use thee as a royal king.
Wherein darest thou dispute with me?
In what doctor and a friar can.
Before rich Europe's worthies put thou forth
The doubtful question unto Vandermast.
Let it be this: whether the spirits of pyromancy
or geomancy be most predominant in magic?
I say, of pyromancy. And I, of geomancy.
The cabalists that write of magic spells,
As Hermes, Melchie, and Pythagoras,
Affirm that 'mongst the quadruplicity
Of elemental essence, terra is but thought
To be a punctum squared to the rest;
And that the compass of ascending elements
Exceed in bigness as they do in height;
Judging the concave circle of the sun
To hold the rest in his circumference.
If, then, as Hermes says, the fire be great'st,
Purest, and only giveth shapes to spirits,
Then must these demones that haunt that place
Be every way superior to the rest.
I reason not of elemental shapes,
Nor tell I of the concave latitudes,
Noting their essence nor their quality,
But of the spirits that pyromancy calls,
And of the vigor of the geomantic fiends.
I tell thee, German, magic haunts the grounds,
And those strange necromantic spells,
That work such shows and wondering in the world,
Are acted by those geomantic spirits
That Hermes calleth terrae filii.
The fiery spirits are but transparent shades
That lightly pass as heralds to bear news;
But earthly fiends, closed in the lowest deep,
Dissever mountains, if they be but charged,
Being more gross and massy in their power.
Rather these earthly geomantic spirits
Are dull and like the place where they remain;
For, when proud Lucifer fell from the heavens,
The spirits and angels that did sin with him
Retained their local essence as their faults,
All subject under Luna's continent.
They which offended less hang in the fire,
And second faults did rest within the air;
But Lucifer and his proud-hearted fiends
Were thrown into the center of the earth,
Having less understanding than the rest,
As having greater sin and lesser grace.
Therefore such gross and earthly spirits do serve
For jugglers, witches, and vild sorcerers;
Whereas the pyromantic genii
Are mighty, swift, and of far-reaching power.
But grant that geomancy hath most force;
Bungay,to please these mighty potentates,
Prove by some instance what thy art can do.
Now, English Harry, here begins the game;
We shall see sport between these learned men.
Show thee the tree leaved with refined gold,
Whereon the fearful dragon held his seat,
That watched the garden called Hesperides,
Subdued and won by conquering Hercules.
What say you, royal lordings, to my friar?
Hath he not done a point of cunning skill?
Each scholar in the necromantic spells
Can do as much as Bungay hath performed.
But as Alcmena's bastard razed this tree,
So will I raise him up as when he lived,
And cause him pull the dragon from his seat,
And tear the branches piecemeal from the root.
Hercules, prodi, prodi, Hercules!
Jove's bastard son, thou Libyan Hercules,
Pull off the sprigs from off the Hesperian tree,
As once thou didst to win the golden fruit.
Now, Bungay, if thou canst by magic charm
The fiend appearing like great Hercules
From pulling down the branches of the tree,
Then art thou worthy to be counted learned.
Cease, Hercules, until I give thee charge.
Mighty commander of this English isle,
Henry, come from the stout Plantagenets,
Bungay is learned enough to be a friar,
But to compare with Jacques Vandermast,
Oxford and Cambridge must go seek their cells
To find a man to match him in his art.
I have given nonplus to the Paduans,
To them of Sien, Florence, and Bologna,
Rheims, Louvain, and fair Rotterdam,
Frankfort, Utrecht, and Orleans;
And now must Henry, if he do me right,
Crown me with laurel, as they all have done.
All hail to this royal company,
That sit to hear and see this strange dispute.
Bungay, how stand'st thou as a man amazed?
What, hath the German acted more than thou?
What art thou that questions thus?
Lordly thou lookest, as if that thou wert learned;
Thy countenance, as if science held her seat
Between the circled arches of thy brows.
Now, monarchs, hath the German found his match.
Bestir thee, Jacques, take not now the foil,
Lest thou dost lose what foretime thou didst gain.
No, unless he were more learned than Vandermast;
For yet, tell me; what hast thou done?
Raised Hercules to ruinate that tree
That Bungay mounted by his magic spells.
Now, Hercules, I charge thee to thy task.
Pull off the golden branches from the root.
I dare not. Seest thou not great Bacon here,
Whose frown doth act more than thy magic can?
By all the thrones and dominations,
Virtues, powers and mighty hierarchies,
I charge thee to obey to Vandermast.
Bacon, that bridles headstrong Belcephon,
And rules Asmenoth, guider of the north,
Binds me from yielding unto Vandermast.
How now, Vandermast, have you met with your match?
Never before was't known to Vandermast
That men held devils in such obedient awe.
Bacon doth more than art, or else I fail.
Why, Vandermast, art thou overcome?
Bacon, dispute with him and try his skill.
I come not, monarchs, for to hold dispute
With such a novice as is Vandermast.
I come to have your royalties to dine
With Friar Bacon here in Brazen-nose;
And for this German troubles but the place,
And holds this audience with a long suspense,
I'll send him to his academy hence.
Thou, Hercules, whom Vandermast did raise,
Transport the German unto Hapsburg straight,
That he may learn by travail, 'gainst the spring,
More secret dooms and aphorisms of art.
Vanish the tree and thou away with him.
Why, Bacon, whither dost thou send him?
To Hapsburg; there your highness at return
Shall find the German in his study safe.
Bacon, thou hast honored England with thy skill,
And made fair Oxford famous by thine art;
I will be English Henry to thyself.
But tell me, shall we dine with thee today?
With me, my lord; and while I fit my cheer,
See where Prince Edward comes to welcome you.
Gracious as the morning star of heaven. 
Is this Prince Edward, Henry's royal son?
How martial is the figure of his face,
Yet lovely and beset with amorets.
At Framingham, my lord, to try your bucks
If they could 'scape the teasers or the toil;
But hearing of these lordly potentates
Landed and progressed up to Oxford town,
I posted to give entertain to them --
Chief, to the Almain monarch; next to him,
And joint with him, Castile and Saxony,
Are welcome as they may be to the English court.
Thus for the men. But see, Venus appears,
Or one that overmatcheth Venus in her shape.
Sweet Eleanor, beauty's high-swelling pride,
Rich nature's glory and her wealth at once,
Fair of all fairs, welcome to Albion;
Welcome to me, and welcome to thine own,
If that thou deign'st the welcome from myself.
Martial Plantagenet, Henry's high-minded son,
The mark that Eleanor did count her aim,
I liked thee 'fore I saw thee; now, I love,
And so as in so short a time I may;
Yet so as time shall never break that so,
And therefore so accept of Eleanor.
Fear not, my lord, this couple will agree,
If love may creep into their wanton eyes;
And therefore, Edward, I accept thee here,
Without suspense as my adopted son.
Let me that joy in these consorting greets,
And glory in these honors done to Ned,
Yield thanks for all these favors to my son,
And rest a true Plantagenet to all.
These scholars knows more skill in axioms,
How to use quips and sleights of sophistry,
Than for to cover courtly for a king.
Lordings, admire not if your cheer be this,
For we must keep our academic fare.
No riot where philosophy doth reign;
And therefore, Henry, place these potentates,
And bid them fall unto their frugal cates.
Presumptuous friar, what, scoff'st thou at a king?
What, dost thou taunt us with thy peasants' fare,
And give us cates fit for country swains?
Henry, proceeds this jest of thy consent,
To twit us with such a pittance of such price?
Tell me, and Frederick will not grieve thee long.
By Henry's honor and the royal faith
The English monarch beareth to his friend,
I knew not of the friar's feeble fare;
Nor am I pleased he entertains you thus.
Content thee, Frederick, for I showed the cates
To let thee see how scholars use to feed,
How little meat refines our English wits.
Miles, take away, and let it be thy dinner. 
I tell thee, monarch, all the German peers
Could not afford thy entertainment such,
So royal and so full of majesty,
As Bacon will present to Frederick.
The basest waiter that attends thy cups
Shall be in honors greater than thyself;
And for they cates, rich Alexandria drugs,
Fetched by carvels from Egypt's richest straits,
Found in the wealthy strond of Africa,
Shall royalize the table of my king.
Wines richer than the 'Gyptian courtesan
Quaffed to Augustus' kingly counter-match
Shall be caroused in English Henry's feasts;
Kandy shall yield the richest of her canes;
Persia, down her Volga by canoes,
Send down the secrets of her spicery;
The Afric dates, mirabolans of Spain,
Conserves and suckets from Tiberias,
Cates from Judea, choicer than the lamp
That fired Rome with sparks of gluttony,
Shall beautify the board for Frederick;
And therefore grudge not at a friar's feast. 
Come, frolic keeper of our liege's game,
Whose table spread hath ever venison
And jacks of wine to welcome passengers,
Know I am in love with jolly Margaret,
That over-shines our damsels as the moon
Dark'neth the brightest sparkles of the night.
In Laxfield here my land and living lies;
I'll make thy daughter jointer of it all,
So thou consent to give her to my wife;
And I can spend five hundred marks a year.
I am the lands lord, keeper, of thy holds;
By copy all thy living lies in me;
Laxfield did never see me raise my due.
I will enfeoff fair Margaret in all,
So she will take her to a lusty squire.
Now, courteous gentles, if the keeper's girl
Hath pleased the liking fancy of you both,
And with her beauty hath subdued your thoughts,
'Tis doubtful to decide the question.
It joys me that such men of great esteem
Should lay their liking on this base estate,
And that her state should grow so fortunate
To be a wife to meaner men than you.
But sith such squires will stoop to keeper's fee,
I will, to avoid displeasure of you both,
Call Margaret forth, and she shall make her choice. 
Content, keeper, send her unto us.
Why, Serlsby, is thy wife so lately dead,
Are all thy loves so lightly passed over,
As thou canst wed before the year be out?
I live not, Lambert, to content the dead;
Nor was I wedded but for life to her.
The grave ends and begins a married state. 
Peggy, the lovely flower of all towns,
Suffolk's fair Helen and rich England's star,
Whose beauty tempered with her huswifery
Makes England talk of merry Fressingfield!
I cannot trick it up with poesies,
Nor paint my passions with comparisons,
Nor tell a tale of Phoebus and his loves;
But this believe me: Laxfield here is mine,
Of ancient rent seven hundred pounds a year,
And, if thou canst but love a country squire,
I will enfeoff thee, Margaret, in all.
I cannot flatter; try me, if thou please.
Brave neighboring squires, the stay of Suffolk's crime,
A keeper's daughter is too base in 'gree
To match with men accompted of such worth.
But might I not displease, I would reply.
Say, Peggy. Naught shall make us discontent.
Then, gentles, note that love hath little stay.
Nor can the flames that Venus sets on fire
Be kindled but by fancy's motion.
Then pardon, gentles, if a maid's reply
Be doubtful, while I have debated with myself,
Who or of whom love shall constrain me like.
Let it be me; and trust me, Margaret,
The meads environed with the silver streams,
Whose battling pastures fatt'neth all my flocks,
Yielding forth fleeces stapled with such wool
As Lempster cannot yield more finer stuff,
And forty kine with fair and burnished heads,
With strouting dugs that paggle to the ground,
Shall serve thy dairy if thou wed with me.
Let pass the country wealth, as flocks and kine,
And lands that wave with Ceres' golden sheaves,
Filling my barns with plenty of the fields;
But, Peggy, if thou wed thyself to me,
Thou shalt have garments of embroidered silk,
Lawns, and rich networks for thy head attire.
Costly shall be thy fair 'abiliments,
If thou wilt be but Lambert's loving wife.
Content you, gentles. You have proffered fair,
And more than fits a country maid's degree.
But give me leave to counsel me a time;
For fancy blooms not at the first assault.
Give me but ten days respite and I will reply
Which or to whom myself affectionates.
Lambert, I tell thee thou art importunate;
Such beauty fits not such a base esquire.
It is for Serlsby to have Margaret.
Think'st thou with wealth to over-reach me?
Serlsby, I scorn to brook thy country braves.
I dare thee, coward, to maintain this wrong
At dint of rapier, single in the field.
I'll answer, Lambert, what I have avouched.
Margaret, farewell; another time shall serve. 
I'll follow. Peggy, farewell to thyself;
Listen how well I'll answer for thy love. 
How Fortune tempers lucky haps with frowns,
And wrongs me with the sweets of my delight.
Love is my bliss; and love is now my bale.
Shall I be Helen in my froward fates,
As I am Helen in my matchless hue,
And set rich Suffolk with my face afire?
If lovely Lacy were but with his Peggy,
The cloudy darkness of his bitter frown
Would check the pride of these aspiring squires.
Before the term of ten days be expired,
When as they look for answer of their loves,
My lord will come to merry Fressingfield
And end their fancies and their follies both;
Till when, Peggy, be blithe and of good cheer.
Fair lovely damsel, which way leads this path?
How might I post me unto Fressingfield?
Which footpath leadeth to the keeper's lodge?
Your way is ready and this path is right.
Myself do dwell hereby in Fressingfield,
And, if the keeper be the man you seek,
I am his daughter. May I know the cause?
Lovely and once beloved of my lord --
No marvel if his eye was lodged so low,
When brighter beauty is not in the heavens --
The Lincoln earl hath sent you letters here,
And with them, just an hundred pounds in gold.
Sweet bonny wench, read them and make reply.
The scrolls that Jove sent Danae,
Wrapped in rich closures of fine burnished gold,
Were not more welcome than these lines to me.
Tell me, whilst that I do unrip the seals,
Lives Lacy well? How fares my lovely lord?
Well, if that wealth may make men to live well.
Fond Ate, doomer of bad-boding fates,
That wraps proud Fortune in thy snaky locks,
Didst thou enchant my birthday with such stars
As lightened mischief from their infancy?
If heavens had vowed, if stars had made decree,
To show on me their froward influence,
If Lacy had but loved, heavens, hell, and all,
Could not have wronged the patience of my mind.
It grieves me, damsel, but the earl is forced
To love the lady by the king's command.
The wealth combined within the English shelves,
Europe's commander, nor the English king
Should not have moved the love of Peggy from her lord.
What answer shall I return to my lord?
First, for thou cam'st from Lacy whom I loved,
Ah, give me leave to sigh at every thought!
Take thou, my friend, the hundred pound he sent;
For Margaret's resolution craves no dower.
The world shall be to her as vanity;
Wealth, trash; love, hate; pleasure, despair.
For I will straight to stately Framingham,
And in the abbey there be shorn a nun,
And yield my loves and liberty to God.
Fellow, I give thee this, not for the news,
For those be hateful unto Margaret,
But for th'art Lacy's man, once Margaret's love.
What I have heard, what passions I have seen,
I'll make report of them unto the earl. (Exit Post.
Say that she joys his fancies be at rest,
And prays that his misfortune may be hers. 
Miles, thou knowest that I have dived into hell
And sought the darkest palaces of fiends;
That with my magic spells great Belcephon
Hath left his lodge and kneeled at my cell;
The rafters of the earth rent from the poles,
And three-formed Luna hid her silver looks,
Trembling upon her concave continent,
When Bacon read upon his magic book.
With seven years' tossing negromantic charms,
Poring upon dark Hecat's principles,
I have framed out a monstrous head of brass,
That, by th' enchanting forces of the devil,
Shall tell out strange and uncouth aphorisms,
And girt fair England with a wall of brass.
Bungay and I have watched these threescore days,
And now our vital spirits crave some rest.
If Argus lived, and had his hundred eyes,
They could not overwatch Phobeter's night.
Now, Miles, in thee rests Friar Bacon's weal;
The honor and renown of all his life
Hangs in the watching of this brazen head.
Therefore, I charge thee by the immortal God,
That holds the souls of men within his fist,
This night thou watch; for, ere the morning star
Sends out his glorious glister on the north,
The head will speak. Then, Miles, upon thy life,
Wake me; for then by magic art I'll work
To end my seven years' task with excellence.
If that a wink but shut thy watchful eye,
Then farewell Bacon's glory and his fame.
Draw close the curtains, Miles. Now, for thy life,
'Tis past indeed. Ah, villain, time is past;
My life, my fame, my glory, all are past.
Bacon, the turrets of thy hope are ruined down;
Thy seven years' study lieth in the dust;
Thy brazen head lies broken through a slave
That watched, and would not when the head did will.
What said the head first? Even, sir, "Time is."
Villain, if thou hadst called to Bacon then,
If thou hadst watched, and waked the sleepy friar,
The brazen head had uttered aphorisms,
And England had been circled round with brass.
But proud Astmeroth, ruler of the north,
And Demogorgon, master of the fates,
Grudge that a mortal man should work so much.
Hell trembled at my deep, commanding spells;
Fiends frowned to see a man their overmatch.
Bacon might boast more than a man might boast,
But now the braves of Bacon hath an end;
Europe's conceit of Bacon hath an end;
His seven years' practice sorteth to ill end;
And, villain, sith my glory hath an end,
I will appoint thee fatal to some end.
Villain, avoid; get thee from Bacon's sight.
Vagrant, go roam and range about the world,
And perish as a vagabond on earth.
Why then, sir, you forbid me your service.
My service, villain, with a fatal curse
That direful plagues and mischief fall on thee.
Some fiend or ghost haunt on thy weary steps,
Until they do transport thee quick to hell;
For Bacon shall have never merry day,
To lose the fame and honor of his head. 
Now, lovely prince, the prince of Albion's wealth,
How fares the Lady Eleanor and you?
What, have you courted and found Castile fit
To answer England in equivalence?
Will't be a match 'twixt bonny Nell and thee?
Should Paris enter in the courts of Greece
And not lie fettered in fair Helen's looks?
Or Phoebus 'scape those piercing amorets
That Daphne glanced at his deity?
Can Edward then sit by a flame and freeze,
Whose heat puts Helen and fair Daphne down?
Now, monarchs, ask the lady if we 'gree.
What, madam, hath my son found grace or no?
Seeing, my lord, his lovely counterfeit,
And hearing how his mind and shape agreed,
I come not, trooped with all this warlike train,
Doubting of love, but so affectionate
As Edward hath in England what he won in Spain.
A match, my lord; these wantons needs must love.
Men must have wives and women will be wed.
Let's haste the day to honor up the rites.
I stand, my lord, amazed at his talk,
How he discourseth of the constancy
Of one surnamed, for beauty's excellence,
The Fair Maid of merry Fressingfield.
'Tis true, my lord, 'tis wondrous for to hear;
Her beauty passing Mars's paramour,
Her virgin's right as rich as Vesta's was.
Lacy and Ned hath told me miracles.
What says Lord Lacy? Shall she be his wife?
Or else Lord Lacy is unfit to live.
May it please your highness give me leave to post
To Fressingfield, I'll fetch the bonny girl,
And prove in true appearance at the court
What I have vouched often with my tongue.
Lacy, go to the querry of my stable
And take such coursers as shall fit thy turn.
Hie thee to Fressingfield and bring home the lass;
And for her fame flies through the English coast,
If it may please the Lady Eleanor,
One day shall match your excellence and her.
We Castile ladies are not very coy.
Your highness may command a greater boon;
And glad were I to grace the Lincoln earl
With being partner of his marriage day.
Gramercy, Nell; for I do love the lord
As he that's second to myself in love.
But Lacy, haste thee post to Fressingfield,
For ere thou hast fitted all things for her state,
The solemn marriage day will be at hand.
I go, my lord. 
How shall we pass this day, my lord?
To horse, my lord. The day is passing fair;
We'll fly the partridge or go rouse the deer.
Follow, my lords; you shall not want for sport.
What means the friar that frolicked it of late
To sit as melancholy in his cell
As if he had neither lost nor won today?
Ah, Bungay, my brazen head is spoiled,
My glory gone, my seven years' study lost.
The fame of Bacon, bruited through the world,
Shall end and perish with this deep disgrace.
Bacon hath built foundation on his fame
So surely on the wings of true report,
With acting strange and uncouth miracles,
As this cannot infringe what he deserves.
Bungay, sit down; for by prospective skill
I find this day shall fall out ominous.
Some deadly act shall 'tide me ere I sleep,
But what and wherein little can I guess.
My mind is heavy, whatso'er shall hap.
Two scholars that desires to speak with you.
Bid them come in. Now, my youths, what would you have?
Sir, we are Suffolk men and neighboring friends,
Our fathers, in their countries, lusty squires;
Their lands adjoin. In Crackfield mine doth dwell,
And his in Laxfield. We are college mates,
Sworn brothers, as our fathers lives as friends.
Hearing your worship kept within your cell
A glass prospective wherein men might see
Whatso their thoughts or hearts' desire could wish,
We come to know how that our fathers fare.
My glass is free for every honest man.
Sit down and you shall see ere long
How or in what state your friendly fathers lives.
Bungay, I smell there will be a tragedy.
Serlsby, thou hast kept thine hour like a man.
Th'art worthy of the title of a squire
That durst, for proof of thy affection,
And for thy mistress' favor, prize thy blood.
Thou know'st what words did pass at Fressingfield,
Such shameless braves as manhood cannot brook;
Ay, for I scorn to bear such piercing taunts,
Prepare thee, Serlsby; one of us will die.
Thou seest I single thee the field,
And what I spake, I'll maintain with my sword.
Stand on thy guard; I cannot scold it out.
And if thou kill me, think I have a son,
That lives in Oxford, in the Broadgates Hall,
Who will revenge his father's blood with blood.
And, Serlsby, I have there a lusty boy
That dares at weapon buckle with thy son,
And lives in Broadgates too, as well as thine.
But draw thy rapier, for we'll have a bout.
Now, lusty younkers, look within the glass,
And tell me if you can discern your sires.
Serlsby, 'tis hard; thy father offers wrong,
To combat with my father in the field.
Lambert, thou liest; my father's is the abuse,
And thou shalt find it, if my father harm.
Our fathers are in combat hard by Fressingfield.
Sit still, my friends, and see the event.
Why stand'st thou, Serlsby? Doubt'st thou of thy life?
A veney, man; fair Margaret craves so much.
Then this, for her! Ah, well thrust. But
mark the ward. 
Oh, I am slain! And I; Lord have mercy on me.
And so is mine. Lambert, I'll quite thee well.
See, friar, where the fathers both lie dead.
Bacon, thy magic doth effect massacre.
This glass prospective worketh many woes;
And therefore, seeing these brave, lusty brutes,
These friendly youths did perish by thine art,
End all thy magic and thine art at once.
The poniard that did end the fatal lives
Shall break the cause efficiat of their woes.
So fade the glass, and end with it the shows
That negromancy did infuse the crystal with.
What means learned Bacon thus to break his glass?
I tell thee, Bungay, it repents me sore
That ever Bacon meddled in this art.
The hours I have spent in pyromantic spells,
The fearful tossing in the latest night
Of papers full of negromantic charms,
Conjuring and adjuring devils and fiends,
With stole and alb and strange pentaganon,
The wresting of the holy name of God,
As Sother, Eloim, and Adonai,
Alpha, Manoth, and Tetragrammaton,
With praying to the five-fold powers of heaven,
Are instances that Bacon must be damned
For using devils to countervail his God.
Yet, Bacon, cheer thee; drown not in despair.
Sins have their salves. Repentance can do much.
Think Mercy sits where Justice holds her seat,
And from those wounds those bloody Jews did pierce,
Which by thy magic oft did bleed afresh,
From thence for thee the dew of mercy drops
To wash the wrath of high Jehovah's ire,
And make thee as a newborn babe from sin.
Bungay, I'll spend the remnant of my life
In pure devotion, praying to my God
That he would save what Bacon vainly lost. 
Margaret, be not so headstrong in these vows.
Oh, bury not such beauty in a cell,
That England hath held famous for the hue.
Thy father's hair, like to the silver blooms
That beautify the shrubs of Africa,
Shall fall before the dated time of death,
Thus to forgo his lovely Margaret.
Ah, father, when the harmony of heaven
Soundeth the measures of a lively faith,
The vain illusions of this flattering world
Seems odious to the thoughts of Margaret.
I loved once; Lord Lacy was my love;
And now I hate myself for that I loved,
And doted more on him than on my God.
For this, I scourge myself with sharp repents.
But now, the touch of such aspiring sins
Tells me all love is lust but love of heavens,
That beauty used for love is vanity.
The world contains naught but alluring baits,
Pride, flattery, and inconstant thoughts.
To shun the pricks of death I leave the world,
And vow to meditate on heavenly bliss,
To live in Framingham a holy nun,
Holy and pure in conscience and in deed;
And for to wish all maids to learn of me
To seek heaven's joy before earth's vanity.
And will you then, Margaret, be shorn a nun,
Now, farewell, world, the engine of all woe.
Farewell to friends and father; welcome, Christ.
Adieu to dainty robes; this base attire
Better befits an humble mind to God
Than all the show of rich 'abiliments.
Love, oh love, and, with fond love, farewell,
Sweet Lacy, whom I loved once so dear;
Ever be well, but never in my thoughts,
Lest I offend to think on Lacy's love.
But even to that, as to the rest, farewell.
Come on, my wags, we're near the keeper's lodge.
Here have I oft walked in the wat'ry meads,
And chatted with my lovely Margaret.
Ah, good my lord, oh, woe is me for Peg!
See where she stands, clad in her nun's attire,
Ready for to be shorn in Framingham.
She leaves the world because she left your love.
Oh, good my lord, persuade her if you can.
Why, how now, Margaret; what, a malcontent?
A nun? What holy father taught you this,
To task yourself to such a tedious life
As die a maid? 'Twere injury to me
To smother up such beauty in a cell.
Lord Lacy, thinking of thy former 'miss,
How fond the prime of wanton years were spent
In love -- oh, fie upon that fond conceit,
Whose hap and essence hangeth in the eye --
I leave both love and love's content at once,
Betaking me to Him that is true love,
And leaving all the world for love of Him.
Whence, Peggy, comes this metamorphosis?
What, shorn a nun? And I have from the court
Posted with coursers to convey thee hence
To Windsor, where our marriage shall be kept.
Thy wedding robes are in the tailors' hands.
Come, Peggy, leave these peremptory vows.
Did not my lord resign his interest,
And make divorce 'twixt Margaret and him?
'Twas but to try sweet Peggy's constancy.
But will fair Margaret leave her love and lord?
Is not heaven's joy before earth's fading bliss,
And life above sweeter than life in love?
Why, then Margaret will be shorn a nun?
Margaret hath made a vow which may not be revoked.
We cannot stay, my lord; and if she be so strict,
Our leisure grants us not to woo afresh.
Choose you, fair damsel; yet the choice is yours.
Either a solemn nunnery or the court;
God or Lord Lacy. Which contents you best,
To be a nun, or else Lord Lacy's wife?
A good motion. Peggy, your answer must be short.
The flesh is frail. My lord doth know it well,
That when he comes with his enchanting face,
Whatso'er betide, I cannot say him nay.
Off goes the habit of a maiden's heart;
And, seeing Fortune will, fair Framingham,
And all the show of holy nuns, farewell.
Lacy for me, if he will be my lord.
Peggy, thy lord, thy love, thy husband.
Trust me, by truth of knighthood, that the king
Stays for to marry matchless Eleanor
Until I bring thee richly to the court,
That one day may both marry her and thee.
How say'st thou, keeper? Art thou glad of this?
As if the English king had given
The park and deer of Fressingfield to me.
What have you fit for breakfast? We have hied
And posted all this night to Fressingfield.
Butter and cheese and humbles of a deer,
Such as poor keepers have within their lodge.
For she speaks least to hold her promise sure. 
How restless are the ghosts of hellish spirits
When every charmer with his magic spells 
Calls us from nine-fold trenched Phlegiton,
To scud and over-scour the earth in post
Upon the speedy wings of swiftest winds.
Now Bacon hath raised me from the darkest deep
To search about the world for Miles his man,
For Miles, and to torment his lazy bones
For careless watching of his brazen head.
See where he comes. Oh, he is mine.
Great potentates, earth's miracles for state,
Think that Prince Edward humbles at your feet,
And, for these favors, on his martial sword
He vows perpetual homage to yourselves,
Yielding these honors unto Eleanor.
Gramercies, lordings. Old Plantagenet,
That rules and sways the Albion Diadem,
With tears discovers these conceived joys,
And vows requital, if his men-at-arms,
The wealth of England, or due honors done
To Eleanor, may quite his favorites.
But all this while, what say you to the dames,
That shine like to the crystal lamps of heaven?
If but a third were added to these two,
They did surpass those gorgeous images
That gloried Ida with rich beauty's wealth.
'Tis I, my lords, who humbly on my knee
Must yield her orisons to mighty Jove,
For lifting up his handmaid to this state,
Brought from her homely cottage to the court,
And graced with kings, princes, and emperors;
To whom, next to the noble Lincoln earl,
I vow obedience and such humble love
As may a handmaid to such mighty men.
Thou martial man that wears the Almain crown,
And you the western potentates of might,
The Albion princess, English Edward's wife,
Proud that the lovely star of Fressingfield,
Fair Margaret, countess to the Lincoln earl,
Attends on Eleanor -- gramercies, lord, for her --
'Tis I give thanks for Margaret to you all,
And rest, for her, due bounden to yourselves.
Seeing the marriage is solemnized,
Let's march in triumph to the royal feast.
But why stands Friar Bacon here so mute?
Repentant for the follies of my youth,
That magic's secret mysteries misled,
And joyful that this royal marriage
Portends such bliss unto this matchless realm.
Or what shall grow from Edward and his queen?
I find by deep prescience of mine art,
Which once I tempered in my secret cell,
That here where Brute did build his Troynovant,
From forth the royal garden of a king
Shall flourish out so rich and fair a bud
Whose brightness shall deface proud Phoebus' flower,
And overshadow Albion with her leaves.
Till then Mars shall be master of the field;
But then the stormy threats of wars shall cease.
The horse shall stamp as careless of the pike;
Drums shall be turned to timbrels of delight;
With wealthy favors plenty shall enrich
The strond that gladded wand'ring Brute to see,
And peace from heaven shall harbor in these leaves
That gorgeous beautifies this matchless flower.
Apollo's hellitropian then shall stoop,
And Venus' hyacinth shall vail her top;
Juno shall shut her gilliflowers up,
And Pallas' bay shall bash her brightest green;
Ceres' carnation, in consort with those,
Shall stoop and wonder at Diana's rose.
This prophecy is mystical.
<JAM4VS.TXT> Brother of England, since our neighboring land
And near alliance doth invite our loves,
The more I think upon our last accord,
The more I grieve your sudden parting hence.
First, laws of friendship did confirm our peace,
Not both the seal of faith and marriage bed,
The name of father, and the style of friend;
These force in me affection full confirmed
So that I grieve -- and this my hearty grief,
The heavens record, the world may witness well --
To loose your presence, who are now to me
A father, brother, and a vowed friend.
Link all these lovely styles, good king, in one;
And since thy grief exceeds in my depart,
I leave my Dorothea to enjoy
Thy whole compact of loves and plighted vows.
Brother of Scotland, this is my joy, my life,
Her father's honor, and her Country's hope,
Her mother's comfort, and her husband's bliss:
I tell thee, king, in loving of my Doll,
Thou bind'st her father's heart and all his friends
In bands of love that death cannot dissolve.
Nor can her father love her like to me,
My life's light, and the comfort of my soul.
Fair Dorothea, that wast England's pride,
Welcome to Scotland; and, in sign of love,
Lo! I invest thee with the Scottish Crown.
Nobles and Ladies, stoop unto your Queen.
And Trumpets sound, that Heralds may proclaim
Fair Dorothea peerless Queen of Scots.
Long live and prosper our fair Queen of Scots!
Thanks to the king of kings for my dignity;
Thanks to my father, that provides so carefully;
Thanks to my Lord and husband for this honor;
And thanks to all that love their King and me.
Long live fair Dorothea, our true Queen!
Long shine the sun of Scotland in her pride,
Her father's comfort, and fair Scotland's bride!
But, Dorothea, since I must depart,
And leave thee from thy tender mother's charge,
Let me advise my lovely daughter first
What best befits her in a foreign land.
Live, Doll, for many eyes shall look on thee,
With care of honor and the present state;
For she that steps to height of Majesty
Is ever the mark whereat the enemy aims.
Thy virtues shall be construed to vice,
Thine affable discourse to abject mind;
If coy, detracting tongues will call thee proud;
Be therefore wary in this slippery state.
Honor thy husband, love him as thy life;
Make choice of friends, as Eagles of their young,
Who sooth no vice, who flatter not for gain --
But love such friends as do the truth maintain.
Think on these lessons when thou art alone
And thou shalt live in health when I am gone.
I will engrave these precepts in my heart;
And as the wind with calmness rows you hence,
Even so I wish the heavens in all mishaps
May bless my father with continual grace.
The favoring wind invites us to depart.
Long circumstance in taking princely leaves
Is more officious than convenient.
Brother of Scotland, love me in my child;
You greet me well, if so you will her good.
Then, lovely Doll, and all that favor me,
Attend to see our English friends at sea;
Let all their charge depend upon my purse.
They are our neighbors, by whose kind accord,
We dare attempt the proudest Potentate.
Only, fair Countess, and your daughter, stay;
With you I have some other thing to say.
So let them triumph that have cause to joy:
But, wretched King, thy nuptial knot is death,
Thy Bride, the breeder of thy Country's ill;
For thy false heart, dissenting from thy hand,
Misled by love, hast made another choice, --
Another choice! -- even when thou vow'dst thy soul
To Dorothea, England's choicest prize.
O, then thy wand'ring eyes bewitched thy heart!
Even in the Chapel did thy fancy change,
When, perjured man, though fair Doll had thy hand,
The Scottish Ida's beauty stale thy heart!
Yet fear and love hath tied thy ready tongue
From blabbing forth the passions of thy mind,
Lest fearful silence have in subtle looks
Betrayed the treason of my new vowed love.
Be fair and lovely, Doll, but here's the prize
That lodgeth here, and entered through mine eyes:
Yet, how so e'er I love, I must be wise.
Now, lovely Countess, what reward or grace
May I employ on you for this your zeal,
And humble honors, done us in our Court
In entertainment of the English King?
It was of duty, Prince, that I have done;
And what in favor may content me most
Is that it please your grace to give me leave
For to return unto my Country home.
But, lovely Ida, is your mind the same?
I count of Court, my Lord, as wise men do;
'Tis fit for those that know what longs thereto:
Each person to his place; the wise to Art,
The Cobbler to his clout, the Swain to Cart.
But, Ida, you are fair; and beauty shines
And seemeth best where pomp her pride refines.
If beauty (as I know there's none in me)
Were sworn my love, and I his life should be;
The farther from the Court I were removed
The more, I think, of heaven I were beloved.
Because the Court is counted Venus' net,
Where gifts and vows for stales are often set.
None, be she chaste as Vesta, but shall meet
A curious tongue to charm her ears with sweet.
Why, Ida, then I see you set at nought 
The force of love.  In sooth this is my thought,
Most gracious king, that they that little prove
Are mickle blest, from bitter sweets of love.
And well I wot, I heard a shepherd sing
That, like a Bee, Love hath a little sting.
He lurks in flowers, he percheth on the trees,
He, on Kings' pillows, bends his pretty knees;
The Boy is blind, but when he will not spy,
He hath a leaden foot and wings to fly.
Beshrew me yet, for all these strange effects,
If I would like the Lad that so infects.
Rare wit, fair face, what heart could more desire? 
But Doll is fair, and doth concern thee near.
Let Doll be fair, she is won; but I must woo
And win fair Ida; there's some choice in two. -- 
But, Ida, thou art coy.  And why, dread King?
A thing as love. Had I my wish. . .  What then?
And were Apollo moved and ruled by me,
His wisdom should be yours, and mine his tree.
But here returns our train. Welcome, fair Doll;
How fares our father? is he shipped and gone?
My royal father is both shipped and gone;
God and fair winds direct him to his home!
Amen, say I. -- Would thou wert with him too.
Then might I have a fitter time to woo.
But Countess, you would be gone; therefore, farewell.
Yet, Ida, if thou wilt, stay thou behind
But if thou like the pleasures of the Court --
Or if she liked me, though she left the Court --
What should I say: I know not what to say. --
You may depart and you, my courteous Queen,
Leave me a space; I have a weighty cause
To think upon. -- Ida, it nips me near;
It came from thence, I feel it burning here.
Now am I free from sight of common eye,
Where to myself I may disclose the grief
That hath too great a part in mine affects.
And now is my time, by wiles and words, to rise
Greater than those that think themselves more wise.
And first, fond King, thy honor doth engrave
Upon thy brows the drift of thy disgrace.
Thy new-vowed love, in sight of God and men,
Links thee to Dorothea during life;
For who more fair and virtuous than thy wife?
Deceitful murderer of a quiet mind,
Fond love, vile lust, that thus misleads us men
To vow our faiths, and fall to sin again!
But Kings stoop not to every common thought:
Ida is fair and wise, fit for a King;
And for fair Ida will I hazard life,
Venture my Kingdom, Country, and my Crown --
Such fire hath love to burn a kingdom down.
Say Doll dislikes that I estrange my love,
Am I obedient to a woman's look?
May, say her father frown when he shall hear
That I do hold fair Ida's love so dear;
Let father frown and fret, and fret and die,
Nor earth, nor heaven shall part my love and I.
Yea, they shall part us; but we first must meet,
And woo, and win; and yet the world not see't.
Yea, there's the wound; and wounded with that thought,
So let me die; for all my drift is nought.
Most gracious and imperial Majesty, --
A little flattery more were but too much. --
That thus darest interrupt a Prince's secrets?
Dread King, thy vassal is a man of Art
Who knows by constellation of the stars,
By oppositions and by dire aspects
The things are past and those that are to come.
But where's thy warrant to approach my presence?
My zeal, and ruth to see your grace's wrong
Makes me lament I did detract so long.
If thou know'st thoughts, tell me, what mean I now?
But lest thou spend thy time in idleness,
And miss the matter that my mind aims at,
Tell me. . . What star was opposite when that was thought?
'Tis inconvenient, mighty Potentate,
Whose looks resemble Jove in Majesty,
To scorn the sooth of science with contempt.
I see in those imperial looks of yours
The whole discourse of love: Saturn combust,
With direful looks, at your nativity
Beheld fair Venus in her silver orb.
I know, by certain axioms I have read,
Your grace's griefs; and, further, can express her name
That holds you thus in fancy's bands.
Thou talkest wonders.  Nought but truth, O King.
'Tis Ida is the mistress of your heart,
Whose youth must take impression of affects;
For tender twigs will bow, and milder minds
Will yield to fancy, be they followed well.
What god art thou, composed in human shape,
Or bold Trophonius to decide our doubts?
How know'st thou this?  Even as I know the means
To work your grace's freedom and your love.
Had I the mind, as many Courtiers have,
To creep into your bosom for your coin,
And beg rewards for every cap and knee,
I then would say if that your grace would give
This lease, this manor, or this patent sealed,
For this or that I would effect your love:
But Ateukin is no Parasite, O Prince.
I know your grace knows scholars are but poor;
And therefore, as I blush to beg a fee,
Your mightiness is so magnificent
You cannot choose but cast some gift apart,
To ease my bashful need that cannot beg.
As for your love, o might I be employed,
How faithfully would Ateukin compass it!
But Princes rather trust a smoothing tongue
Than men of Art that can accept the time.
Ateukin, if so thy name, for so thou say'st,
Thine Art appears in entrance of my love;
And since I deem thy wisdom matched with truth,
I will exalt thee, and thyself alone
Shalt be the Agent to dissolve my grief.
Sooth is, I love, and Ida is my love;
But my new marriage nips me near, Ateukin,
For Dorothea may not brook th' abuse.
These lets are but as motes against the sun,
Yet not so great; like dust before the wind,
Yet not so light. Tut, pacify your grace:
You have the sword and sceptre in your hand;
You are the King, the state depends on you;
Your will is law. Say that the case were mine,
Were she my sister whom your highness loves,
She should consent, for that our lives, our goods,
Depend on you; and if your Queen repine,
Although my nature cannot brook of blood,
And Scholars grieve to hear of murderous deeds --
But if the Lamb should let the Lion's way,
By my advice the Lamb should lose her life.
Thus am I bold to speak unto your grace,
Who am too base to kiss your royal feet;
For I am poor, nor have I land nor rent,
Nor countenance here in Court; but for my love,
Your Grace shall find none such within the realm.
Wilt thou effect my love? Shall she be mine?
I'll gather Moly, crocus, and the herbs
That heal the wounds of body and the mind;
I'll set out charms and spells; nought shall be left
To tame the wanton if she shall rebel:
Give me but tokens of your highness' trust.
Thou shalt have gold, honor and wealth enough;
Win me my Love, and I will make thee great.
These words do make me rich, most noble Prince;
I am more proud of them than any wealth.
Did not your grace suppose I flatter you,
Believe me, I would boldly publish this:
Was never eye that saw a sweeter face,
Nor never ear that heard a deeper wit:
O God, how I am ravished in your worth!
Ateukin, follow me; love must have ease.
I'll kiss your highness feet, march when you please. 
Come under mine arm, sir, or get a footstool;
Or else, by the light of the Moon, I must come to it.
Agree, my masters, every man to his height.
Ere I will stoop to a thistle, I will change turns;
As good luck comes on the right hand as the left.
But tell me, fellows, till better occasion come,
And I can lick a dish before a Cat.
But in earnest, now tell me of what trades are you two?
Marry, I'll tell you, I have many trades:
The Cozening trade as I find occasion.
Nor a fool to prove a Justice as you do.
So doth many more than I in Scotland.
Why so, Ateukin, this becomes thee best,
Wealth, honor, ease, and angels in thy chest:
Now may I say, as many often sing,
"No fishing to the sea, nor service to a king."
Unto this high promotion doth belong
Means to be talked of in the thickest throng.
And first to fit the humors of my Lord,
Sweet lays and lines of love I must recard;
And such sweet lines and love-lays I'll indite,
As men may wish for, and my liege delight.
And next, a train of gallants at my heels,
That men may say the world doth run on wheels;
For men of art, that rise by indirection
To honor and the favor of their King,
Must use all means to save what they have got,
And win their favors whom they never knew.
If any frown to see my fortunes such,
A man must bear a little, not too much.
But, in good time, these bills portend, I think,
That some good fellows do for service seek.
Truly, no; for they are nought, and so art thou.
If thou hast no better qualities, stand by.
But tell me, lovely Eustace, as thou lov'st me,
Among the many pleasures we have past,
Which is the ripest in thy memory,
To draw thee over to thine ancient friend?
What makes Sir Bartram thus inquisitive?
Tell me, good knight, am I welcome or no?
By sweet Saint Andrew and may sale I swear
As welcome is my honest Dick to me
As morning's sun, or as the wat'ry moon
In murk'est night, when we the borders track.
I tell thee, Dick, thy sight hath cleared my thoughts
Of many baneful troubles that there wound.
As welcome to Sir Bartram as his life!
But tell me, bonny Dick, hast got a wife?
A wife? God shield, Sir Bartram, that were ill,
To leave my wife and wander thus astray;
But time and good advice, ere many years,
May chance to make my fancy bend that way.
What news in Scotland? therefore came I hither,
To see your Country and to chat together.
Why man, our Country's blithe, our king is well,
Our Queen so so, the Nobles well, and worse
And well are they that were about the king,
But better are the Country Gentlemen.
And may I tell thee, Eustace, in our lives
We old men never saw so wondrous change.
But leave this trattle, and tell me what news
In lovely England with our honest friends?
The king, the Court, and all our noble friends
Are well; and God in mercy keep them so!
The Northern Lords and Ladies here abouts
That know I came to see your Queen and Court
Commend them to my honest friend, Sir Bartram,
And many others that I have not seen.
Among the rest, the Countess Eleanor
From Carlisle, where we merry oft have been,
Greets well my Lord, and hath directed me
By message this fair Lady's face to see.
I tell thee, Eustace, lest mine old eyes daze,
This is our Scottish moon and evening's pride;
This is the blemish of your English Bride.
Who sails by her, are sure of wind at will;
Her face is dangerous, her sight is ill.
And yet in sooth, sweet Dick, it may be said
The king hath folled, there's virtue in the maid.
But knows my friend this portrait? be advised.
Is it not Ida, the Countess of Arain's daughter's?
So was I told by Eleanor of Carlisle.
But tell me, lovely Bartram, is the maid
Evil-inclined, misled, or Concubine
Unto the King or any other Lord?
Should I be brief and true, then thus, my Dick:
All England's ground yields not a blither Lass;
Nor Europe can exceed her for her gifts
Of virtue, honor, beauty, and the rest.
But our fond king, not knowing sin in lust,
Makes love by endless means and precious gifts;
And men that see it dare not say't, my friend,
But we may wish that it were otherwise.
But I bid thee to view the picture still,
For by the person's sights there hangs some ill.
O, good sir Bartram, you suspect I love --
Then were I mad -- her whom I never saw.
But howsoe'er, I fear not enticing;
Desire will give no place unto a king.
I'll see her whom the world admires so much,
That I may say with them, there lives none such.
Be Gad and shall both see and talk with her;
And when th' hast done, whate'er her beauty be,
I'll warrant thee her virtues may compare
With the proudest she that waits upon your Queen.
My Lady entreats your Worship in to supper.
Guid bonny Dick, my wife will tell thee more;
Was never no man in her book before.
Be Gad, she's blithe, fair, lovely, bonny, etc.
Be Gad, gramercies, little king, for this;
This sport is better in my exile life
Than ever the deceitful world could yield.
I tell thee, Bohan, Oberon is king
Of quiet, pleasure, profit, and content
Of wealth, of honor, and of all the world
Tied to no place, yet all are tied to one.
Live thou this life exiled from world and men
And I will show thee wonders ere we part.
Then mark my story and the strange doubts
That follow flatterers, lust, and lawless will
And then say I have reason to forsake the world
And all that are within the same.
Go shroud us in our harbor, where we'll see
The pine of folly, as it ought to be.
Here see I good fond actions in thy jig
And means to paint the world's inconstant ways.
But turn thine eyne; see what I can command.
What gars this din of mirk and baleful harm
Where every queen is all betaint with blood?
This shows thee, Bohan, what is worldly pomp.
Semiramis, the proud Assyrian Queen,
When Ninus died, did levy in her wars
Three millions of footmen to the fight,
Five hundred thousand horse, of armed chars
A hundred thousand more, yet in her pride
Was hurt and conquered by Stabrobates.
Then what is pomp?  I see thou hast thine eyne,
Thou bonny King, if Princes fall from high
My fall is past, until I fall to die.
Now mark my talk, and prosecute my jig.
How should these crafts withdraw thee from the world?
But look, my Bohan, pomp allureth.
What meaneth this?  Cyrus of Persia,
Mighty in life, within a marble grave
Was laid to rot; whom Alexander once
Beheld entombed, and weeping did confess
Nothing in life could 'scape from wretchedness.
Why then boast men?  What reck I then of life,
Who make the grave my home, the earth my wife?
I can no more; my patience will not warp
To see these flatterers how they scorn and carp.
Sike is the world; but whilke is he I saw?
Sesostris, who was conqueror of the world,
Slain at the last and stamped on by his slaves.
How blest are poor men, then, that know their graves!
Now mark the sequel of my Jig;
And he weel meet ends. The mirk and sable night
Doth leave the peering morn to pry abroad;
Thou nill me stay: hail, then, thou pride of kings!
I ken the world, and wot well worldly things.
Mark thou my jig, in murkiest terms that tells
The loathe of sins and where corruption dwells.
Hail me ne mere with shows of goodly sights;
My grave is mine, that rids me from despites.
Accept my jig, guid King, and let me rest;
The grave with guid men is a gay-built nest.
The rising sun doth call me hence away.
Thanks for thy jig, I may no longer stay.
But if my train did wake thee from thy rest,
So shall they sing thy lullaby to nest. 
Fair Ida, might you choose the greatest good,
Midst all the world in blessings that abound,
Wherein, my daughter, should your liking be?
Not in delights, or pomp, or majesty.
And why?  Since these are means to draw the mind
From perfect good, and make true judgment blind.
Might you have wealth, and fortune's richest store?
Yet would I (might I choose) be honest poor.
For she that sits at fortune's feet alow
Is sure she shall not taste a further woe;
But those that prank on top of fortune's ball
Still fear a change, and fearing, catch a fall.
Tut, foolish maid, each one contemneth need.
Good reason why, they know not good indeed.
Many marry, then, on whom distress doth lour.
Yes; they that virtue deem an honest dower.
Madam, by right this world I may compare
Unto my work, wherein with heedful care
The heavenly workman plants with curious hand,
As I with needle draw each thing on land,
Even as he list: some men like to the Rose
Are fashioned fresh; some in their stalks do close,
And born do suddenly die; some are but weeds,
And yet from them a secret good proceeds.
I with my needle, if I please, may blot
The fairest rose within my cambric plot;
God with a beck can change each worldly thing,
The poor to worth, the beggar to the king.
What then hath man wherein he well may boast,
Since by a beck he lives, a lover is lost?
Peace, Ida, here are strangers near at hand.
Madam, God speed!  I thank you, gentle squire.
The Country Countess of Northumberland
Doth greet you well, and hath requested me
To bring these letters to your Ladyship.
I thank her honor and yourself, my friend.
I see she means you good, brave Gentleman.
Daughter, the Lady Eleanor salutes
Yourself as well as me; then for her sake
'Twere good you entertained that Courtier well.
As much salute as may become my sex,
And he in virtue can vouchsafe to think,
I yield him for the courteous Countess' sake.
Good sir, sit down; my mother here and I
Count time misspent an endless vanity.
Beyond report, the wit, the fair, the shape!
What work you here, fair Mistress? may I see it?
Good Sir, look on; how like you this compact?
Methinks in this I see true love in act
The Woodbines with their leaves do sweetly spread,
The Roses blushing prank them in their red;
No flower but boasts the beauties of the spring;
This bird hath life indeed if it could sing. . .
What means, fair Mistress, had you in this work?
My needle, sir.  In needles, then, there lurks
Some hidden grace I deem beyond my reach.
Not grace in them, good sir, but those that teach.
Say that your needle now were Cupid's sting. . .
What if it were?  Then see a wondrous thing;
I fear me you would paint in Tereus' heart
Affection in his power and chiefest part.
Good Lord, sir, no! for hearts but pricked soft
Are but wounded sore, for so I hear it oft.
What recks the wound, where but your happy eye
May make him live, whom Jove hath judged to die?
Should life and death within this needle lurk,
I'll prick no hearts, I'll prick upon my work.
Peace, Ida, I perceive the fox at hand.
The fox? why fetch your hounds and chase him hence.
O, sir, these great men bark at small offense.
Come, will it please you enter, gentle sir?
Stay, courteous Ladies; favor me so much
As to discourse a word or two apart.
Good sir, my daughter learns this rule of me
To shun resort, and strangers' company;
For some are shifting mates that carry letters,
Some, such as you, too good because our betters.
Not angry, Ida, but I teach this knave
How to behave himself among his betters.
Behold, fair Countess, to assure your stay,
I here present the signet of the king,
Who now by me, fair Ida, doth salute you.
And since in secret I have certain things
In his behalf, good Madam to impart,
I crave your daughter to discourse apart.
She shall in humble duty be addressed
To do his Highness' will in what she may.
Now, gentle sir, what would his grace with me?
Fair, comely Nymph, the beauty of your face,
Sufficient to bewitch the heavenly powers,
Hath wrought so much in him, that now of late
He finds himself made captive unto love;
And though his power and Majesty requires
A straight command before an humble suit,
Yet he his mightiness doth so abase
As to entreat your favor, honest maid.
Is he not married, sir, unto our Queen?
He is.  And are not they by God accursed,
That sever them whom he hath knit in one?
They be: what then? we seek not to displace
The Princess from her seat; but, since by love
The king is made your own, she is resolved
In private to accept your dalliance,
In spite of war, or watch, or worldly eye.
O, how he talks! as if he should not die;
As if that God in justice once could wink
Upon that fault I am ashamed to think.
Tut, Mistress, man at first was born to err;
Women are all not formed to be Saints.
'Tis impious for to kill our native king,
Whom by a little favor we may save.
Better than live unchaste, to live in grave.
He shall erect your state and wed you well.
But can his warrant keep my soul from hell?
He will enforce, if you resist his suit.
What though? the world may shame to him account
To be a king of men and worldly pelf,
Yet hath no power to rule and guide himself.
I know you, gentle Lady, and the care
Both of your honor and his grace's health
Makes me confused in this dangerous state.
So counsel him, but sooth thou not his sin;
'Tis vain allurement that doth make him love.
I shame to hear; be you ashamed to move.
I see my daughter grows impatient.
I fear me, he pretends some bad intent.
Will you despise the king, and scorn him so?
In all allegiance I will serve his grace,
But not in lust. O, how I blush to name it!
An endless work is this; how should I frame it?
Go take him in and feast this merry swain.
Sirrah, my cook is your physician;
He hath a purge for to disgest the world.
Will you not, Ida grant his highness this?
As I have said, in duty I am his.
For other lawless lusts that ill beseem him,
I cannot like, and good I will not deem him.
Ida, come in. and sir, if so you please,
Come take a homely widow's entertain.
If he have no great haste, he may come nigh;
If haste, though he be gone, I will not cry.
I see this labor lost, my hope in vain;
Yet will I try another drift again.
O wrack of Commonweal! O wretched state!
O hapless flock whereas the guide is blind!
O heedless youth where counsel is despised!
Come, pretty knave, and prank it by my side.
Let's see your best attendance out of hand.
Madam, although my limbs are very small,
My heart is good: I'll serve you therewithal.
How? if I were assailed, what couldst thou do?
Madam, call help, and boldly fight it to.
Although a Bee be but a little thing,
You know, fair Queen, it hath a bitter sting.
How couldst thou do me good, were I in grief?
Counsel, dear Princess, is a choice relief.
Though Nestor wanted force, great was his wit;
And though I am but weak, my words are fit.
Like to a ship upon the Ocean seas,
Tossed in the doubtful stream without a helm,
Such is a Monarch without good advice.
I am o'erheard! cast rain upon thy tongue.
Andrew's beware; reproof will breed a scar.
Good day, my Lord.  Lord Morton, well y-met...
Whereon deems Lord Douglas all this while?
Of that which yours and my poor heart doth break.
Although fear shuts our mouths, we dare not speak.
What mean these Princes sadly to consult?
Somewhat, I fear, betideth them amiss.
They are so pale in looks, so vexed in mind.
In happy hour, ye Noble Scottish Peers,
Have I encountered you, what makes you mourn?
If we with patience may attention gain,
Your Grace shall know the cause of all our grief.
Speak on, good father; come and sit by me.
I know thy care is for the common good.
As fortune, mighty Princess, reareth some
To high estate and place in Commonweal,
So by divine bequest to them is lent
A riper judgment and more searching eye,
Whereby they may discern the common harm;
For where our fortunes in the world are most,
Where all our profits rise and still increase,
There is our mind; thereon we meditate.
And what we do partake of good advice,
That we employ for to concern the same.
To this intent, these nobles and myself,
That are (or should be) eyes of Commonweal,
Seeing his highness retchless course of youth,
His lawless and unbridled vein in love,
His too intentive trust to flatterers,
His abject care of counsel and his friends,
Cannot but grieve; and since we cannot draw
His eye or Judgment to discern his faults,
Since we have spake and counsel is not heard,
I, for my part, (let others as they list)
Will leave the Court, and leave him to his will,
Lest with a ruthful eye I should behold
His overthrow, which, sore I fear is nigh.
Ah father, are you so estranged from love,
From due allegiance to your Prince and land,
To leave your King when most he needs your help?
The thrifty husbandmen are never wont,
That see their lands unfruitful, to forsake them;
But when the mold is barren and unapt,
They toil, they plow, and make the fallow fat.
The pilot in the dangerous seas is known;
In calmer waves the silly sailor strives.
Are you not members, Lords, of Commonweal;
And can your head, your dear anointed King,
Default, ye Lords, except yourselves do fail?
O, stay your steps; return, and counsel him!
Men seek not moss upon a rolling stone,
Or water from the sieve, or fire from ice,
Or comfort from a retchless monarch's hands.
Madam, he sets us light that served in Court,
In place of credit in his father's days.
If we but enter presence of his grace,
Our payment is a frown, a scoff, a frump;
Whilst flattering Gnatho pranks it by his side,
Soothing the careless King in his misdeeds.
And if your grace consider your estate,
His life should urge you too, if all be true.
Why, Douglas, why?   As if you have not heard
His lawless love to Ida grown of late,
His careless estimate of your estate.
Ah, Douglas, thou misconstruest my love.
He doth but tempt his wife, he tries my love
This injury pertains to me, not you.
The King is young; and if he step awry,
He may amend, and I will love him still.
Should we disdain our vines because they sprout
Before their time? Or young men if they strain
Beyond their reach? no; vines that bloom and spread
Do promise fruits, and young men that are wild
In age grow wise. My friends and Scottish Peers,
If that an English Princess may prevail,
Stay; stay with him. Lo, how my zealous prayer
Is plead with tears. Fie, Peers, will you hence?
Madam, 'tis virtue in your grace to plead;
But we that see his vain untoward course,
Cannot but fly the fire before it burn,
And shun the Court before we see his fall.
Will you not stay? then, Lordings, fare you well.
Though you forsake your King, the heavens, I hope,
Will favor him through mine incessant prayer.
Content you, Madam; thus old Ovid sings:
'Tis foolish to bewail recureless things.
Peace, Dwarf; these words my patience move.
Although you charm my speech, charm not my love.
Douglas, how now! why changest thou thy cheer?
My private troubles are so great, my liege,
As I must crave your license for a while,
For to intend mine own affairs at home.
You may depart. But why is Morton sad?
The like occasion doth impart me too,
So I desire your grace to give me leave.
Well, sir, you may betake you to your ease.
When such grim sirs are gone, I see no let
To work my will.  What, like the Eagle, then,
With often flight wilt thou thy feathers lose?
O King, canst thou endure to see thy Court
Of finest wits and Judgments dispossessed,
Whilst cloaking craft with soothing climbs so high
As each bewails ambition is so bad?
Thy father left thee with estate and Crown,
A learned council to direct thy Court;
These carelessly, O King, thou castest off,
To entertain a train of Sycophants.
Thou well mayst see, although thou wilt not see,
That every eye and ear both sees and hears
The certain signs of thine incontinence.
Thou art allied unto the English King
By marriage; a happy friend indeed,
If used well; if not, a mighty foe.
Thinketh your grace he can endure and brook
To have a partner in his daughter's love?
Thinketh your grace the grudge of privy wrongs
Will not procure him change his smiles to threats?
O, be not blind to good! call home your Lords,
Displace these flattering Gnathos, drive them hence;
Love, and with kindness take your wedlock wife;
Or else (which God forbid) I fear a change:
Sin cannot thrive in courts without a plague.
Go pack thou too, unless thou mend thy talk
On pain of death, proud Bishop, get you gone,
Unless you headless mean to hop away.
Thou god of heaven prevent my country's fall.
These stays and lets to pleasure plague my thoughts,
Forcing my grievous wounds anew to bleed;
But care that hast transported me so far,
Fair Ida, is dispersed in thought of thee,
Whose answer yields me life or breeds my death.
Yond comes the messenger of weal or woe.
The adamant, o King will not be filed
But by itself, and beauty that exceeds,
By some exceeding favor must be wrought.
Ida is coy as yet, and doth repine,
Objecting marriage, honor, fear, and death.
She's holy, wise, and too precise for me.
Are these thy fruits of wits, thy sight in Art?
Thine eloquence? thy policy? thy drift?
To mock thy Prince? then, caitiff, pack thee hence,
And let me die devoured in my love.
Good Lord, how rage gainsayeth reason's power!
My dear, my gracious and beloved Prince,
The essence of my soul, my God on earth,
Sit down and rest yourself; appease your wrath,
Lest with a frown ye wound me to the death.
O, that I were included in my grave,
That either now, to save my Prince's life,
Must counsel cruelty, or lose my King!
Why, sirrah, is there means to move her mind?
O, should I not offend my royal liege. . .
Tell all; spare nought, so I may gain my love.
Alas, my soul, why art thou torn in twain,
For fear thou talk a thing that should displease?
Tut, speak what so thou wilt, I pardon thee.
How kind a word, how courteous is his grace!
Who would not die to succor such a king?
My liege, this lovely maid of modest mind
Could well incline to love, but that she fears
Fair Dorothea's power; your grace doth know
Your wedlock is a might let to love.
Were Ida sure to be your wedded wife,
That then the twig would bow you might command.
Ladies love presents, pomp, and high estate.
Ah, Ateukin, how should we displace this let?
Tut, mighty Prince, o, that I might be whist!
Why dalliest thou?  I will not move my Prince;
I will prefer his safety 'fore my life.
Hear me, o king, 'tis Dorothea's death
Must do you good.  What! murder of my Queen?
Yet, to enjoy my love, what is my Queen?
O, but my vow and promise to my Queen. . .
Aye! but my hope to gain a fairer Queen.
With how contrarious thoughts am I withdrawn!
Why linger I 'twixt hope and doubtful fear?
If Dorothea die, will Ida love?
Then let her die! Devise, advise the means;
All likes me well that lends me hope in love.
What, will your grace consent? then let me work.
There's here in Court a Frenchman, Jacques called,
A fit performer for our enterprise,
Whom I by gifts and promise will corrupt
To slay the Queen, so that your grace will seal
A warrant for the man, to save his life.
Nought shall he want; write thou, and I will sign.
And, gentle Gnatho, if my Ida yield,
Thou shalt have what thou wilt. I'll give thee straight
A Barony, an Earldom for reward.
Frolic, young king; the Lass shall be your own.
I'll make her blithe and wanton by my wit.
So, Oberon, now it begins to work in kind.
The ancient Lords by leaving him alone,
Disliking of his humors and despite,
Let him run headlong, till his flatterers,
Sweet'ning his thoughts of luckless lust
With vile persuasions and alluring words,
Make him make way by murder to his will.
Judge, fairy king, hast heard a greater ill?
Nor seen more virtue in a country maid.
I tell thee, Bohan, it doth make me sad
To think the deeds the king means to perform.
To change that humor, stand and see the rest.
I trow my son Slipper will show's a jest.
Now after this beguiling of our thoughts,
And changing them from sad to better glee,
Let's to our sell, and sit and see the rest;
For, I believe, this Jig will prove no jest.
Ho, fellow! stay, and let me speak with thee.
Why, I rub horses, sir.  And what of that?
Here is overmuch wit, in good earnest.
This is the thing for which I sued so long!
This is the lease which I, by Gnatho's means,
Sought to possess by patent from the King;
But he, injurious man, who lives by crafts,
And sells king's favors for who will give most,
Hath taken bribes of me, yet covertly
Will sell away the thing pertains to me.
But I have found a present help, I hope,
For to prevent his purpose and deceit.
Stay, gentle friend.  A good word! thou hast won me;
This word is like a warm caudle to a cold stomach.
Sirrah, wilt thou, for money and reward,
Convey me certain letters, out of hand,
Sieur Jacques, this our happy meeting rids
Your friends and me of care and grievous toil;
For I that look into deserts of men
And see among the soldiers in this court
A noble forward mind, and judge thereof,
Cannot but seek the means to raise them up
Who merit credit in the Commonweal.
To this intent, friend Jacques, I have found
A means to make you great, and well esteemed
Both with the king and with the best in Court;
For I espy in you a valiant mind,
Which makes me love, admire, and honor you.
To this intent (if so your trust and faith,
Your secrecy be equal with your force)
I will impart a service to thyself,
Which if thou dost effect, the King, myself,
And what or he, and I with him, can work,
Shall be employed in what thou wilt desire.
Then hoping on thy truth, I prithee see
How kind Ateukin is to forward thee.
Hold, take this earnest penny of my love
And mark my words; the King, by me, requires
No slender service, Jacques, at thy hands.
Thou must by privy practice make away
The Queen, fair Dorothea, as she sleeps,
Or how thou wilt, so she be done to death.
Thou shalt not want promotion here in Court.
Thou shalt have warrant, Jacques, from the King;
None shall outface, gainsay, and wrong my friend.
Do not I love thee, Jacques? fear not, then.
I tell thee who so toucheth thee in ought
Shall injure me. I love, I tender thee;
Thou art a subject fit to serve his grace.
Jacques, I had a written warrant once,
But that by great misfortune late is lost.
Come, wend we to Saint Andrew's, where his grace
Is now in progress, where he shall assure
Thy safety, and confirm thee to the act.
Thy credit, Bartram, in the Scottish Court,
Thy reverend years, the strictness of thy vows,
All these are means sufficient to persuade;
But love, the faithful link of royal hearts,
That hath possession of my constant mind,
Exiles all dread, subdueth vain suspect.
Methinks no craft should harbor in that breast
Where Majesty and virtue is installed.
Methinks my beauty should not cause my death.
How gladly, sovereign Princess, would I err,
And bide my shame to save your royal life!
'Tis Princely in yourself to think the best,
To hope his grace is guiltless of this crime;
But if in due prevention you default,
How blind are you that were forewarned before!
Suspicion without cause deserveth blame.
Who see, and shun not harms, deserve the same.
Behold the tenor of this traitorous plot.
What should I read? Perhaps he wrote it not.
Here is his warrant, under seal and sign,
To Jacques, born in France, to murder you.
Ah careless King, would God this were not thine!
What though I read? Ah, should I think it true?
The hand and seal confirms the deed is his.
What know I though, if now he thinketh this?
Madame, Lucretius saith that to repent
Is childish, wisdom to prevent.  What though?
Then cease your tears that have dismayed you,
And cross the foe before he have betrayed you.
What needs these long suggestions in this cause,
When every circumstance confirmeth truth?
First, let the hidden mercy from above
Confirm your grace, since by a wondrous means
The practice of your dangers came to light.
Next, let the tokens of approved truth
Govern and stay your thoughts, too much seduced,
And mark the sooth, and listen the intent.
Your highness knows, and these my noble Lords
Can witness this, that whilst your husband's sire
In happy peace possessed the Scottish Crown,
I was his sworn attendant here in Court;
In dangerous fight I never failed my Lord
And since his death, and this your husband's reign,
No labor, duty, have I left undone
To testify my zeal unto the Crown.
But now my limbs are weak, mine eyes are dim,
Mine age unwieldy and unmeet for toil;
I came to court in hope for service past
To gain some lease to keep me, being old.
There found I all was upsy turvy turned,
My friends displaced, the Nobles loath to crave.
Then sought I to the minion of the King,
Ateukin, who, allured by a bribe,
Assured me of the lease for which I sought.
But see the craft! when he had got the grant,
He wrought to sell it to Sir Sylvester,
In hope of greater earnings from his hands.
In brief, I learnt his craft and wrought the means
By one his needy servants for reward,
To steal from out his pocket all the briefs;
Which he performed, and with reward resigned.
Them when I read, (now mark the power of God),
I found this warrant sealed among the rest,
To kill your grace, whom God long keep alive!
Thus, in effect, by wonder you are saved.
Trifle not, then, but seek a speedy flight;
God will conduct your steps, and shield the right.
What should I do? ah, poor unhappy Queen,
Born to endure what fortune can contain!
Alas, the deed is too apparent now!
But, o mine eyes, were you as bent to hide
As my poor heart is forward to forgive.
Ah cruel king, my love would thee acquit.
O what avails to be allied and matched
With high estates, that marry but in show?
Were I baser born, my mean estate
Could warrant me from this impendent harm;
But to be great and happy, these are twain.
Ah Ross, what shall I do? how shall I work?
With speedy letters to your father send,
Who will revenge you and defend your right.
As if they kill not me, who with him fight!
As if his breast be touched, I am not wounded!
As if he wailed, my joys were not confounded!
We are one heart, though rent by hate in twain;
One soul, one essence doth our weal contain. . .
What then can conquer him, that kills not me?
If this advice displease, then, Madam, flee.
Where may I wend or travel without fear?
Where not, in changing this attire you wear?
What, shall I clad me like a Country maid?
The policy is base, I am afraid.
Why, Nano?  Ask you why? what, may a Queen
March forth in homely weed and be not seen?
The Rose, although in thorny shrubs she spread,
Is still the Rose, her beauties wax not dead;
And noble minds, although the coat be bare,
Are by their semblance known, how great they are.
The Dwarf saith true.  What garments lik'st thou then?
Such as may make you seem a proper man.
He makes me blush and smile, though I am sad.
The meanest coat for safety is not bad.
What, shall I jet in breeches like a squire?
Alas, poor dwarf, thy Mistress is unmeet.
Tut, go me thus, your cloak before your face,
Your sword upreared with quaint and comely grace.
If any come and question what you be,
Say you, a man, and call for witness me.
What, should I wear a sword? to what intent?
Madam, for show; it is an ornament.
If any wrong you, draw! a shining blade
Withdraws a coward thief that would invade.
But if I strike, and he should strike again,
What should I do? I fear I would be slain.
No, take it single on your dagger so.
I'll teach you, Madam, how to ward a blow.
How little shapes much substance may include!
Sir Bartram, Ross, ye Ladies and my friends,
Since presence yields me death, and absence life,
Hence will I fly disguised like a squire,
As one that seeks to live in Irish wars.
You, gentle Ross, shall furnish my depart.
Yea, Prince, and die with you with all my heart.
Vouchsafe me then, in all extremest states,
To wait on you and serve you with my best.
To me pertains the woe, live thou in rest.
Friends, fare you well; keep secret my depart.
Nano alone shall my attendant be.
Then, Madam, are you manned? I warrant ye,
Give me a sword, and if there grow debate,
I'll come behind and break your enemy's pate.
How sore we grieve to part so soon away.
Grieve not for those that perish if they stay.
The time in words misspent is little worth;
Madam, walk on and let them bring us forth.
So these sad motions make the fairy sleep;
And sleep he shall in quiet and content,
For it would make a marble melt and weep
To see these treasons 'gainst the innocent.
But since she 'scapes by flight to save her life,
The king may chance repent she was his wife.
The rest is ruthful; yet to beguile the time,
'tis interlaced with merriment and rime.
Say, Gentlemen, where may we find the king?
And at this hour he taken hath a stand
To kill a Deer.  A pleasant work in hand.
Follow your sport, and we will seek his grace.
When such him seek, it is a woeful case.
Lord Eustace, as your youth and virtuous life
Deserve a far more fair and richer wife,
So, since I am a mother, and do wit
What wedlock is, and that which 'longs to it,
Before I mean my daughter to bestow
'Twere meet that she and I your state did know.
Madam, if I consider Ida's worth,
I know my portions merit none so fair;
And yet I hold in farm and yearly rent
A thousand pound, which may her state content.
But what estate, my Lord, shall she possess?
All that is mine, grave Countess, and no less.
But Ida, will you love?   I cannot hate.
But will you wed?  'Tis Greek to me, my Lord;
I'll wish you well, and thereon take my word.
Shall I some sign of favor, then, receive?
Ay, if her Ladyship will give me leave.
Do what thou wilt.  Then, noble English Peer,
Accept this ring, wherein my heart is set;
A constant heart with burning flames bereft,
But under written this: O morte dura.
Hereon when so you look with eyes Pura,
The maid you fancy most will favor you.
I'll try this heart, in hope to find it true.
What are you, friends, that thus doth wish us well?
Your neighbors nigh, that have on hunting been,
Who understanding of your walking forth,
Prepared this train to entertain you with:
This Lady Douglas, this Sir Egmond is.
Welcome, ye Ladies, and thousand thanks for this;
Come, enter you a homely widow's house,
And if mine entertainment please you, let us feast.
A lovely lady never wants a guest.
Stay, gentle Ida; tell me what you deem.
What doth this hart, this tender heart, beseem?
Why not, my Lord since nature teacheth art
To senseless beasts to cure their grievous smart;
Dictanum serves to close the wound again.
What help for those that love?  Why, love again.
Were I the Hart...  Then I the herb would be.
You shall not die for help; come, follow me.
Ah Nano, I am weary of these weeds;
Weary to wield this weapon that I bear;
Weary of love, from whom my woe proceeds;
Weary of toil, since I have lost my dear.
O weary of life, where wanted no distress,
But every thought is paid with heaviness.
Too much of weary, madam; if you please,
Sit down, let weary die, and take your ease.
How look I, Nano? like a man or no?
If not a man, yet like a manly shrew.
If any come and meet us on the way,
What should we do if they enforce us stay?
Set cap a huff, and challenge him the field;
Suppose the worst, the weak may fight to yield.
The battle, Nano, in this troubled mind
Is far more fierce than ever we may find.
The body's wounds by medicines may be eased,
But griefs of mind by salves are not appeased.
Say Madam, will you hear your Nano sing?
Of woe, good boy, but of no other thing.
What if I sing of fancy, will it please?
To such as hope success such notes breed ease.
What if I sing, like Damon, to my sheep?
Like Phylis, I will sit me down to weep.
Nay; since my songs afford such pleasure small,
I'll sit me down, and sing you none at all.
O be not angry, Nano.  Nay; you loathe
To think on that which doth content us both.
And how?  You scorn disport when you are weary,
And loathe my mirth, who live to make you merry.
Danger and fear withdraw me from delight.
'Tis virtue to contemn false Fortune's spite.
What should I do to please thee, friendly squire?
A smile a day is all I will require;
And if you pay me well the smiles you owe me,
I'll kill this cursed care, or else beshrew me.
We are descried; o Nano, we are dead!
Tut, yet you walk; indeed you are not dead.
Draw me your sword, if he your way withstand,
And I will seek for rescue out of hand.
Run, Nano, run; prevent thy Prince's death.
Fear not; I'll run all danger out of breath.
Callest me strumpet! Caitiff as thou art!
But even a Princess born, who scorns thy threats
Shall never Frenchman say, an English maid
Of threats of foreign force will be afraid.
God shield me, hapless princess and a wife.
And save my soul, although I lose my life.
Ah, I am slain! some piteous power repay
This murderer's cursed deed, that doth me slay.
Where is this poor distressed gentleman?
Here laid on ground, and wounded to the death.
Ah, gentle heart, how are these beauteous looks
Dimmed by the tyrant cruelties of death!
O weary soul, break thou from forth my breast,
And join thee with the soul I honored most.
Leave mourning, friend; the man is yet alive.
Some help me to convey him to my house.
There will I see him carefully recured,
And send privy search to catch the murderer.
The God of heaven reward thee, courteous knight.
Stay, Jacques, fear not; sheathe thy murdering blade.
Lo, here thy King and friends are come abroad
To save thee from the terrors of pursuit.
O then, my liege, how happy art thou grown,
How favored of the heavens, and blest by love!
Methinks I see fair Ida in thine arms,
Craving remission for her late contempt;
Methinks I see her blushing steal a kiss,
Uniting both your souls by such a sweet,
And you, my King, suck Nectar from her lips.
Why then delays your grace to gain the rest
You long desired? why lose we forward time?
Write, make me spokesman now, vow marriage.
If she deny your favor, let me die.
Your grace must bear with imperfections;
This is exceeding love that makes him speak.
Ateukin, I am ravished in conceit,
And yet depressed again with earnest thoughts.
Methinks this murder soundeth in mine ear
A threat'ning noise of dire and sharp revenge;
I am incensed with grief, yet fain would joy.
What may I do to end me of these doubts?
Why Prince, it is no murder in a King,
To end another's life to save his own.
For you are not as common people be
Who die and perish with a few men's tears;
But if you fail, the state doth whole default,
The Realm is rent in twain, in such a loss;
And Aristotle holdeth this for true
Of evils needs we must choose the least:
Then better were it that a woman died
Than all the help of Scotland should be blent.
'Tis policy, my liege, in every state,
To cut off members that disturb the head;
And by corruption generation grows,
And contraries maintain the world and state.
Enough; I am confirmed. Ateukin, come,
Read me of love, and rid me of my grief;
Drive thou the tyrant from this tainted breast
Then may I triumph in the height of joy.
Go to mine Ida, tell her that I vow
To raise her head and make her honors great.
Go to mine Ida, tell her that her hairs
Shall be embellished with orient pearls,
And Crowns of Sapphires compassing her brows
Shall war with those sweet beauties of her eyes.
Go to mine ida, tell her that my soul
Shall keep her semblance closed in my breast;
And I, in touching of her milk-white mold,
Will think me deified in such a grace.
I like no stay; go write, and I will sign.
Reward me Jacques; give him store of Crowns.
And sirrah Andrew, scout thou here in Court,
And bring me tidings if thou canst perceive
The least intent of muttering in my train;
For either those that wrong thy Lord or thee
Shall suffer death.  How much o mighty king,
Is thy Ateukin bound to honor thee!
Bow thee, Andrew, bend thine sturdy knees;
Seest thou not here thine only God on earth?
Come, follow me. His grave, I see, is made,
That thus on sudden he hath left us here.
Come, Jacques; we will have our packet soon dispatched,
And you shall be my mate upon the way.
Was never such a world, I think, before,
When sinners seem to dance within a net:
The flatterer and murderer grow big;
By hook or crook promotion now is sought.
In such a world, where men are so misled,
What should I do, but, as the Proverb saith,
Run with the Hare, and hunt with the Hound --
To have two means beseems a witty man.
Now here in Court I may aspire and climb
By subtlety before my master's death
And if that fail, well fare another drift.
I will in secret certain letters send
Unto the English King, and let him know
The order of his daughter's overthrow;
That if my master crack his credit here,
As I am sure long flattery cannot hold,
I may have means within the English court
To 'scape the scourge that waits on bad advice.
Believe me, bonny Scot, these strange events
Are passing pleasing, may they end as well.
Else say that Bohan hath a barren skull,
If better motions yet than any past
Do not more glee to make the fairy greet.
But my small son made pretty handsome shift
To save the Queen, his Mistress, by his speed.
Yea, and yon Laddie, for his sport he made,
Shall see, when least he hopes, I'll stand his friend,
Or else he capers in a halter's end.
What, hang my son? I trow not, Oberon;
I'll rather die than see him woe begone.
Bohan, be pleased; for, do they what they will,
Here is my hand, I'll save thy son from ill.
My gentle friend, beware, in taking air,
Your walks grow not offensive to your wounds.
Madam, I thank you of your courteous care;
My wounds are well nigh closed, though sore they are.
Methinks these closed wounds should breed more grief.
Since open wounds have cure, and find relief.
Madam, if undiscovered wounds you mean,
They are not cured, because they are not seen.
And. I mean the wounds which do the heart subdue.
O that is love: Madam, speak I not true?
Say it were true, what salve for such a sore?
Be wise, and shut such neighbors out of door.
How if I cannot drive him from my breast?
Then chain him well, and let him do his best.
In ripping up their wounds I see their wit;
But if these wounds be cured, I sorrow it.
Why are you so intentive to behold
My pale and woeful looks, by care controlled?
Because in them a ready way is found
To cure my care, and heal my hidden wound.
Good Master, shut your eyes, keep that conceit;
Surgeons give Coin to get a good receipt.
Peace, wanton son; this Lady did amend
My wounds; mine eyes her hidden grief shall end.
Look not too much, it is a weighty case.
Where as a man puts on a maiden's face,
For many times, if Ladies 'ware them not,
A none month's wound with little work is got.
I'll break off their dispute, lest love proceed
From covert smiles, to perfect love indeed.
The cat's abroad, stir not, the mice be still.
Tut, we can fly such cats, when so we will.
How fares my guest? take cheer, nought shall default,
That either doth concern your health or joy.
Use me; my house, and what is mine is yours.
Thanks, gentle knight; and if all hopes be true,
I hope ere long to do as much for you.
Your virtue doth acquit me of that doubt;
But courteous sir, since troubles calls me hence,
I must to Edinburgh, unto the king,
There to take charge and weight him in his wars.
Meanwhile, good Madam, take this squire in charge,
And use him so as if it were myself.
Sir Cuthbert, doubt not of my diligence;
Meanwhile, till your return, God send you health.
God bless his grace, and if his cause be just
Prosper his wars; if not, he'll mend, I trust.
Good sir, what moves the king to fall to arms?
The king of England forageth his land,
And hath besieged Dunbar with mighty force.
What other news are common in the Court?
Read you these letters, Madam; tell the squire
The whole affairs of state, for I must hence.
God prosper you, and bring you back from thence!
Madam, what news?  They say the Queen is slain.
Tut, such reports more false than truth contain.
But these reports have made his Nobles leave him.
Ah, careless men, and would they so deceive him?
The land is spoiled, the commons fear the cross;
All cry against the king, their cause of loss.
The English king subdues and conquers all.
Alas, this war grows great on causes small!
Our Court is desolate, our Prince alone,
Still dreading death.  Woe's me, for him I moan!
Assails my heart!   Good Madam, stand his friend;
Give us some liquor to refresh his heart.
Daw thou him up, and I will fetch thee forth
Potions of comfort to repress his pain.
Fie, Princess; faint on every fond report?
How well nigh had you opened your estate!
Cover these sorrows with the veil of joy,
And hope the best; for why this war will cause
A great repentance in your husband's mind.
Ah Nano, trees live not without their sap,
And Clitia cannot blush but on the sun;
The thirsty earth is broke with many a gap,
And lands are lean where rivers do not run:
Where soul is rest from that it loveth best,
How can it thrive or boast of quiet rest?
Thou knowest the Prince's loss must be my death,
His grief, my grief; his mischief must be mine.
O if thou love me, Nano, hie to Court!
Tell Ross, tell Bartram, that I am alive;
Conceal thou yet the place of my abode.
Will them, even as they love their Queen,
As they are chary of my soul and joy,
To guard the King, to serve him as my Lord.
Haste thee, good Nano, for my husband's care
Consumeth me, and wounds me to the heart.
Madam, I go; yet loath to leave you here.
Go thou with speed: even as thou hold'st me dear,
Now sir, what cheer? come taste this broth I bring.
My grief is past; I feel no further sting.
Where is your dwarf? Why hath he left you, sir?
For some affairs; he is not travelled far.
If so you please, come in and take your rest.
Fear keeps awake a discontented breast.
What means this triumph, friend? why are these feasts?
Fair Ida, sir, was married yesterday
Unto sir Eustace, and for that intent
We feast and sport it thus to honor them.
And, if you please, come in and take your part;
My Lady is no niggard of her cheer.
What, was I born to be the scorn of kin?
To gather feathers like to a hopper crow,
And lose them in the height of all my pomp?
Accursed man, now is my credit lost!
Where are my vows I made unto the king?
What shall become of me, if he shall hear
That I have caused him kill a virtuous Queen,
And hope in vain for that which now is lost?
Where shall I hide my head? I know the heavens
Are just, and will revenge; I know my sins
Exceed compare -- should I proceed in this?
This Eustace must amain be made away.
O were I dead, how happy should I be!
Thou dost me good to leave me thus alone,
That galling grief and I may yoke in one.
O what are subtle means to climb on high,
When every fall swarms with exceeding shame?
I promised Ida's love unto the Prince,
But she is lost, and I am false forsworn.
I practiced Dorothea's hapless death,
And by this practice have commenced a war.
O cursed race of men, that traffic guile,
And in the end themselves and kings beguile!
Ashamed to look upon my Prince again;
Ashamed of my suggestions and advice;
Ashamed of life; ashamed that I have erred.
I'll hide myself, expecting for my shame.
Thus God doth work with those that purchase fame
By flattery, and make their Prince their gain.
Thus far, ye English Peers, have we displayed
Our waving Ensigns with a happy war;
Thus nearly hath our furious rage revenged
My daughter's death upon the traitorous Scot.
And now before Dunbar our camp is pitched;
Which, if it yield not to our compromise,
The plow shall furrow where the palace stood,
And fury shall envy so high a power
That mercy shall be banished from our swords.
Scot, open those gates and let me enter in;
Submit thyself and thine unto my grace,
Or I will put each mother's son to death,
And lay this City level with the ground.
For what offense? for what default of ours
Art thou incensed so sore against our state?
Can generous hearts in nature be so stern
To prey on those that never did offend?
What though the Lion king of brutish race
Through outrage, sin; shall lambs be therefore slain?
Or is it lawful that the humble die
Because the mighty do gainsay the right?
O English King, thou bearest in thy crest
The King of beasts, that harms not yielding ones:
The Roseal cross is spread within thy field,
A sign of peace, not of revenging war.
Be gracious, then, unto this little town;
And, though we have withstood thee for a while
To show allegiance to our liefest liege,
Yet since we know no hope of any help,
Take us to mercy, for we yield ourselves.
What, shall I enter then, and be your Lord?
We will submit us to the English king.
Now life and death dependeth on my sword.
This hand now reared, my Douglas, if I list,
Could part thy head and shoulders both in twain;
But since I see thee wise and old in years,
True to thy king, and faithful in his wars,
Live thou and thine. Dunbar is too too small
To give an entrance to the English king;
I, Eagle-like, disdain these little souls,
And look on none but those that dare resist.
Enter your town, as those that live by me;
For others that resist, kill, forage, spoil!
Mine English soldiers, as you love your king,
Revenge his daughter's death, and do me right.
My friends, what think you of this present state?
Were ever seen such changes in a time?
The manners and the fashions of this age
Are, like the Ermine skin, so full of spots
As sooner may the Moor be washed white,
Than these corruptions banished from this Realm.
What sees Master Lawyer in this state amiss?
A wresting power that makes a nose of wax
Of grounded law, a damned and subtle drift
In all estates to climb by other's loss,
An eager thirst of wealth, forgetting truth.
Might I ascend unto the highest states
And by descent discover every crime
My friends, I should lament, and you would grieve
To see the hapless ruins of this Realm.
O Lawyer, thou hast curious eyes to pry
Into the secret maims of their estate;
But if thy veil of error were unmasked,
Thyself should see your sect do maim her most.
Are you not those that should maintain the peace,
Yet only are the patrons of our strife?
If your profession have his ground and spring
First from the laws of God, then country's right,
Not any ways inverting nature's power,
Why thrive you by contentions? Why devise you
Clauses and subtle reasons to except?
Our state was first, before you grew so great,
A Lantern to the world for unity;
Now they that are befriended and are rich
Oppress the poor: come Homer without coin,
He is not heard. What shall we term this drift?
To say the poor man's cause is good and just,
And yet the rich man gains the best in law.
It is your guise (the more the world laments)
To coin Provisos to beguile your laws,
To make a gay pretext of due proceeding,
When you delay your common pleas for years.
Mark what these dealings lately here have wrought:
The crafty men have purchased great men's lands;
They pole, they pinch, their tenants are undone;
If these complain, by you they are undone;
You fleece them of their coin, their children beg,
And many want, because you may be rich:
This scar is mighty, master Lawyer.
Now war hath gotten head within this land,
Mark but the guise. The poor man that is wronged
Is ready to rebel; he spoils, he pills.
We need no foes to forage that we have.
The law (say they) in peace consumed us,
And now in war we will consume the law.
Look to this mischief, Lawyers! Conscience knows
You live amiss; amend it, lest you end.
Good Lord, that these Divines should see so far
In other's faults, without amending theirs!
Sir, sir, the general defaults in state,
(If you would read before you did correct)
Are, by a hidden working from above,
By their successive changes still removed.
Were not the law by contraries maintained,
How could the truth from falsehood be discerned?
Did we not taste the bitterness of war,
How could we know the sweet effects of peace?
Did we not feel the nipping winter frosts,
How should we know the sweetness of the spring?
Should all things still remain in one estate,
Should not in greatest arts some scars be found?
Were all upright and changed, what world were this?
A Chaos, made of quiet, yet no world,
Because the parts thereof did still accord;
This matter craves a variance, not a speech.
But, sir Divine, to you: look on your maims,
Divisions, sects, your simonies and bribes,
Your cloaking with the great, for fear to fall:
You shall perceive you are the cause of all.
Did each man know there were a storm at hand,
Who would not clothe him well, to shun the wet?
Did Prince and Peer, the lawyer and the least
Know what were sin, without a partial gloss,
We'd need no long discovery then of crimes,
For each would mend, advised by holy men.
Thus I but slightly shadow out your sins;
But if they were depainted out for life,
Alas, we both had wounds enough to heal!
None of you both, I see, but are in fault;
Thus simple men, as I, do swallow flies.
This grave Divine can tell us what to do;
But we may say, Physician, mend thyself.
This Lawyer hath a pregnant wit to talk;
But all are words, I see no deeds of worth.
Good Merchant, lay your fingers on your mouth;
Be not a blab, for fear you bite yourself.
What should I term your state, but even the way
To every ruin in this Commonweal?
You bring us in the means of all excess;
You rate it, and retail it as you please;
You swear, forswear, and all to compass wealth;
Your money is your God, your hoard your heaven;
You are the groundwork of contention.
First heedless youth by you is overreached;
We are corrupted by your many crowns.
The Gentlemen, whose tills you have bought,
Lose all their fathers' toil within a day,
Whilst Hob your son, and Sib your nut-brown child,
Are Gentlefolks, and Gentles are beguiled.
This makes so many Noble minds to stray,
And take sinister courses in the state.
My friends, begone! and if you love your lives,
Enter the camp for fear you be surprised.
The King of England marcheth here at hand.
Thanks, gentle scout. God mend that is amiss,
And place true zeal whereas corruption is!
What news in Court, Nano? let us know it.
If so you please, my Lord, I straight will show it.
The English king hath all the borders spoiled,
Hath taken Morton prisoner, and hath slain
Seven thousand Scottish lads not far from Tweed.
A woeful murder, and a bloody deed.
The king, our liege hath sought by many means
For to appease his enemy by prayers;
Nought will prevail unless he can restore
Fair Dorothea, long supposed dead.
To this intent he hath proclaimed late,
That whosoever return the Queen to Court
Shall have a thousand Marks for his reward.
He loves her then, I see, although enforced,
That would bestow such gifts for to regain her.
Why sit you sad, good sir? be not dismayed.
I'll lay my life, this man would be a maid.
Fain would I show myself and change my 'tire.
Whereon divine you, sir?  Upon desire.
Madam, mark but my skill, I'll lay my life,
My master here will prove a married wife.
Wilt thou bewray me, Nano?  Madam, no;
You are a man, and like a man you go;
But I that am in speculation seen,
Know you would change your state to be a Queen.
Thou art not, dwarf, to learn thy mistress' mind;
Fain would I wish thyself disclose my kind,
But yet I blush.  What blush you, Madam, then
To be yourself, who are a feigned man?
Deceitful beauty, hast thou scorned me so?
Nay; muse not, madam, for he tells you true.
Beauty bred love, and love hath bred my shame.
And women's faces work more wrongs than these.
Take comfort, Madam, to cure your disease.
And yet he loves a man as well as you,
Only this difference, he cannot fancy two.
Blush, grieve, and die in thine insatiate lust!
Nay; live and joy that thou hast won a friend
That loves thee as his life by good desert.
I joy, my Lord, more than my tongue can tell;
Though not as I desired, I love you well.
But modesty, that never blushed before,
Discover my false heart. I say no more
Let me alone.  Good Nano, stay a while.
Were I not sad, how kindly could I smile
To see how fain I am to leave this weed;
And yet I faint to show myself indeed.
But danger hates delay, I will be bold.
Fair lady, I am not, as you suppose,
A man, but even that Queen, more hapless I,
Whom Scottish King appointed hath to die.
I am the hapless Princess for whose right
These kings in bloody wars revenge despite.
I am that Dorothea whom they see,
Your bounden for your kindness and relief;
And since you are the means that save my life,
Yourself and I will to the Camp repair,
Whereas you husband shall enjoy reward,
And bring me to his highness once again.
Pardon, most gracious Princess, if you please,
My rude discourse and homely entertain;
And if my words may savor any worth,
Vouchsafe my counsel in this weighty cause.
Since that our liege hath so unkingly dealt,
Give him no trust, return unto your sire;
There may you safely live in spite of him.
Ah Lady, so would worldly counsel work;
But constancy, obedience, and my love,
In that my husband is my Lord and chief,
These call me to compassion of his state.
Dissuade me not, for virtue will not change.
What wondrous constancy is this I hear!
If English dames their husbands love so dear,
I fear me in the world they have no peer.
Come, Princess, wend; and let us change your weed.
I long to see you now a Queen indeed.
He would have parley, Lords: Herald, say he shall,
And get thee gone: go, leave me to myself.
'Twixt love and fear, continual is the war;
The one assures me of my Ida's love,
The other moves me for my murdered Queen.
Thus find I grief of that whereon I joy,
And doubt in greatest hope, and death in weal.
Alas, what hell may be compared with mine,
Since in extremes my comforts do consist?
War then will cease, when dead ones are revived;
Some then will yield, when I am dead for hope.
Who doth disturb me? Andrew? Ay, my liege.
I think my mouth was made at first
To tell these tragic tales, my liefest Lord.
What, is Ateukin dead? tell me the worst.
No, but your Ida -- shall I tell him all?
Is married late (ah, shall I say to whom?)
My master sad (for why he shames the Court)
Is fled away; ah most unhappy flight!
Only myself -- ah, who can love you more?
To show my duty, (duty past belief,)
Am come unto your grace, (o gracious liege,)
To let you know -- o would it were not thus!
That love is vain, and maids soon lost and won.
How have the partial heavens, then, dealt with me,
Boarding my weal, for to abase my power!
Alas, what thronging thoughts do me oppress!
Injurious love is partial in my right,
And flattering tongues, by whom I was misled,
Have laid a snare to spoil my state and me.
Methinks I hear my Dorothea's ghost
Howling revenge for my accursed hate;
The ghosts of those my subjects that are slain
Pursue me, crying out, woe, woe to lust!
The foe pursues me at my palace door;
He breaks my rest, and spills me in my Camp.
Ah, flattering brood of Sycophants, my foes!
First shall my dire revenge begin on you.
And thou shalt have thy recompense for that.
Lords, bear them to the prison, chain them fast,
Until we take some order for their deaths.
If so your grace in such sort gives rewards,
Let me have nought; I am content to want.
Then hang them both as traitors to the King.
Why dally you? go draw them hence away.
Why stay you? move me not. Let search be made
For vile Ateukin; who so finds him out
Shall have give hundred marks for his reward.
Away with them.Lords, troop about my tent.
Let all our soldiers stand in battle 'ray,
For, lo, the English to their parley come.
What seeks the King of England in this land?
False, traitorous Scot, I come for to revenge
My daughter's death; I come to spoil thy wealth,
Since thou hast spoiled me of my marriage joy.
I come to heap thy land with Carcasses,
That this thy thirsty soil, choked up with blood,
May thunder forth revenge upon thy head.
I come to quit thy loveless love with death!
In brief, no means of peace shall e'er be found,
Except I have my daughter or thy head.
My head, proud King? abase thy pranking plumes;
So striving fondly, mayst thou catch thy grave.
But if true judgment do direct thy course,
These lawful reasons should decide the war;
Faith, not by my consent thy daughter died.
Thou liest, false Scot! thy agents have confessed it.
These are but fond delays; thou canst not think
A means to reconcile me for thy friend.
I have thy parasite's confession penned;
What then canst thou allege in thy excuse?
I will repay the ransom for her blood.
What, think'st thou, caitiff, I will sell my child?
No, if thou be a Prince and man at arms,
In single combat come and try thy right,
Else will I prove thee recreant to thy face.
I brook no combat, false injurious King;
But since thou needless art inclined to war,
Do what thou darest; we are in open field.
Arming my battles, I will fight with thee.
Agreed! Now trumpets, sound a dreadful charge.
Fight for your Princess, my brave Englishmen!
Now for your lands, your children, and your wives,
My Scottish Peers, and lastly for your King!
Stay, Princes; wage not war! a privy grudge
'Twixt such as you, (most high in Majesty),
Afflicts both nocent and the innocent.
How many swords, dear Princes, see I drawn!
The friend against his friend, a deadly friend;
A desperate division in those lands
Which, if thy join in one, command the world.
O, stay! with reason mitigate your rage;
And let an old man, humbled on his knees,
Entreat a boon, good Princes, of you both.
I condescend, for why thy reverend years
Impart some news of truth and consequence.
I am content, for Anderson I know;
Thou art my subject, and dost mean me good.
But by your gracious favors grant me this,
To swear upon your sword to do me right.
See, by my sword, and by a Prince's faith,
In every lawful sort I am thine own.
And by my Sceptre and the Scottish Crown,
I am resolved to grant thee thy request.
I see you trust me, Princes, who repose
The weight of such a war upon my will.
Now mark my suit: a tender Lion's whelp,
This other day, came straggling in the woods,
Attended by a young and tender hind,
In courage haughty, yet 'tired like a lamb.
The Prince of beasts had left this young in keep,
To foster up as love-mate and compeer,
Unto the Lion's mate, a neighbor friend.
This stately guide, seduced by the fox,
Sent forth an eager Wolf, bred up in France,
That gripped the tender whelp, and wounded it.
By chance, as I was hunting in the woods,
I heard the moan the hind made for the whelp;
I took them both, and brought them to my house.
With chary care I have recured the one;
And since I know the lions are at strife
About the loss and damage of the young,
I bring her home; make claim to her who list.
I am the whelp, bred by this Lion up,
This royal English king, my happy sire;
Poor Nano is the hind that 'tended me.
My father, Scottish king, gave me to thee,
A hapless wife: thou, quite misled by youth
Hast sought sinister loves and foreign joys.
The fox Ateukin, cursed Parasite,
Incensed your grace to send the wolf abroad,
The French born Jacques, for to end my days;
He, traitorous man, pursued me in the woods,
And left me wounded -- where this noble knight
Both rescued me and mine, and saved my life.
Now keep thy promise: Dorothea lives;
Give Anderson his due and just reward.
And since, you kings, your wars began by me,
Since I am safe returned, surcease your fight.
Durst I presume to look upon those eyes
Which I have tired with a world of woes,
Or did I think submission were enough,
Or sighs might make an entrance to thy soul,
You heavens, you know how willing I would weep;
You heavens can tell how glad I would submit;
You heavens can say how firmly I would sigh.
Shame me not, Prince; companion in thy bed.
Youth has misled, tut, but a little fault;
'Tis kingly to amend what is amiss.
Might I with twice as many pains as these
Unite our hearts, then should my wedded Lord
See how incessant labors I would take.
My gracious father, govern your affects;
Give me that hand that oft hath blest this head,
And clasp thine arms, that have embraced this neck,
About the shoulders of my wedded spouse.
Ah mighty Prince, this king and I am one:
Spoil thou his subjects, thou despoilest me;
Touch thou his breast, thou dost attaint this heart.
O be my father, then, in loving him.
Thou provident kind mother of increase,
Thou must prevail; ah, nature, thou must rule!
Hold, daughter, join my hand and his in one;
I will embrace him for to favor thee.
I call him friend, and take him for my son.
Ah royal husband, see what God hath wrought!
Thy foe is now thy friend. Good men at arms,
Do you the like. These nations if they join,
What Monarch with his liegemen in this world,
Dare but encounter you in open field?
All wisdom joined with godly piety!
Thou English king, pardon my former youth;
And pardon, courteous Queen, my great misdeed;
And, for assurance of mine after life,
I take religious vows before my God,
To honor thee for father, her for wife.
But yet my boons, good Princes, are not past.
First, English king, I humbly do request
That by your means our Princess may unite
Her love unto mine alder truest love,
Now you will love, maintain, and help them both.
Good Anderson, I grant thee thy request.
But you, my Prince, must yield me mickle more.
You know your Nobles are your chiefest stays,
And long time have been banished from your Court;
Embrace and reconcile them to yourself,
They are your hands whereby you ought to work.
As for Ateukin and his lewd compeers,
That soothed you in your sins and youthly pomp,
Exile, torment, and punish such as they;
For greater vipers never may be found
Within a state than such aspiring heads,
That reck not how they climb, so that they climb.
Guid Knight, I grant thee thy suit. First, I submit
And humbly crave a pardon of your grace.
Next, courteous Queen, I pray thee by thy loves
Forgive mine errors past, and pardon me.
My Lords and Princes, if I have misdone
(As I have wronged indeed both you and yours),
Hereafter, trust me, you are dear to me.
As for Ateukin, who so finds the man,
Let him have Martial law, and straight be hanged,
As all his vain abetters now are dead.
And Anderson our Treasurer shall pay
Three thousand marks for friendly recompense.
But Princes, whilst you friend it thus in one,
Methinks of friendship Nano shall have none.
What would my Dwarf, that I will not bestow?
My boon, fair Queen, is this, that you would go.
Although my body is but small and neat,
My stomach, after toil, requireth meat.
An easy suit, dread Princes; will you wend?
Art thou a Pigmy born, my pretty friend?
Not so, great King; but nature, when she framed me,
Was scant of earth, and Nano therefore named me.
And when she saw my body was so small,
She gave me wit to make it big withal.
Till time when?  Eat, then. My friend, it stands with wit,
To take repast when stomach serveth it.
Thy policy, my Nano, shall prevail.
Come, royal father, enter we my tent:
And soldiers, feast it, frolic it like friends.
My Princes, bid this kind and courteous train
Partake some favors of our late accord.
Thus wars have end; and, after dreadful hate,
Men learn at last to know their good estate.
<SELIVS.txt>
Leave me my Lords until I call you forth,
For I am heavy and disconsolate.
So Bajazet, now thou remainest alone,
Unrip the thoughts that harbor in thy breast,
And eat thee up, for arbiter here's none,
That may descry the cause of thy unrest,
Unless these walls thy secret thoughts declare,
And Princes' walls they say, unfaithful are.
Why that's the profit of great regiment,
That all of us are subject unto fears,
And this vain show and glorious intent,
Privy suspicion on each scruple rears,
Ay, though on all the world we make extent,
From the South pole unto the Northern bears,
And stretch our reign from East to Western shore,
Yet doubt and care are with us evermore.
Look how the earth clad in her summer's pride,
Embroidereth her mantle gorgeously,
With fragrant herbs, and flowers gaily dyed,
Spreading abroad her spangled Tapestry:
Yet under all a loathsome snake doth hide.
Such is our life, under Crowns, cares do lie,
And fear the sceptre still attends upon,
O who can take delight in kingly throne?
Public disorders joined with private cark,
Care of our friends, and of our children dear,
Do toss our lives, as waves a silly bark.
Though we be fearless, 'tis not without fear,
For hidden mischief lurketh in the dark:
And storms may fall, be the day ne'er so clear.
He knows not what it is to be a King,
That thinks a sceptre is a pleasant thing.
Twice fifteen times hath fair Latona's son
Walked about the world with his great light:
Since I began, would I had ne'er begun
To sway this sceptre. Many a careful night
When Cynthia in haste to bed did run.
Have I with watching vexed my aged sprite?
Since when what dangers I have overpassed,
Would make a heart of adamant aghast.
The Persian Sophi mighty Ismael,
Took the Levant clean away from me,
And Caraguis Bassa sent his force to quell,
Was killed himself the while his men did flee.
Poor Hali Bassa having once sped well,
And gained of him a bloody victory,
Was at the last slain fighting in the field,
Charactering honor in his batt'red shield.
Ramirchan the Tartarian Emperor,
Gathering to him a number numberless,
Of big bond Tartars in a hapless hour
Encount'red me, and there my chiefest bless
Good Alemshae (ah this remembrance sour)
Was slain the more t' augment my sad distress,
In leasing Alemshae poor, I lost more
Than ever I had gained theretofore.
Well may thy soul rest in her latest grave,
Sweet Alemshae the comfort of my days,
That thou mightst live, how often did I crave?
How often did I bootless prayers raise
To that high power that life first to thee gave?
Trusty wast thou to me at all assays,
And dearest child thy father oft hath cried,
That thou hadst lived, so he himself had died.
The Christian Armies, oftentimes defeated
By my victorious father's valiance,
Have all my Captains famously confronted,
And cracked in two our uncontrolled lance.
My strongest garrisons they have supplanted,
And overwhelmed me in sad mischance:
And my decrease so long wrought their increase,
Till I was forced conclude a friendly peace.
Now all these are but foreign damages,
Taken in war whose die uncertain is,
But I shall have more home-born outrages,
Unless my divination aims amiss:
I have three sons all of unequal ages,
And all in diverse studies set their bliss.
Corcut my eldest a Philosopher,
Acomat pompous, Selmi a warrior.
Corcut in fair Magnesia leads his life,
In learning Arts, and Mahound's dreaded laws:
Acomat loves to court it with his wife,
And in a pleasant quiet joys to pause:
But Selmi follows wars in dismal strife,
And snatcheth at my Crown with greedy claws:
But he shall miss of that he aimeth at,
For I reserve it for my Acomat.
For Acomat? Alas it cannot be,
Stern Selimus hath won my people's heart,
The Janissaries love him more than me:
And for his cause will suffer any smart.
They see he is a friend to chivalry,
And sooner will they from my faith depart,
And by strong hand Bajazet pull thee down,
Then let their Selmi hop without the Crown.
Ah, if the soldiers overrule thy state,
And nothing must be done without their will,
If every base and upstart runagate
Shall cross a Prince and overthwart him still.
If Corcut, Selimus, and Acomat,
With crowns and kingdoms shall their hungers fill?
Poor Bajazet what then remains to thee?
But the bore title of thy dignity.
Ay, and unless thou do dissemble all,
And wink at Selimus aspiring thought:
And then thy Empire is but dearly bought.
Ah that our sons thus to ambition thrall,
Should set the law of Nature all at nought.
But what must be, cannot choose but be done,
Come Bassas enter, Bajazet hath done.
Dread Emperor, long may you happy live,
Loved of your subjects, and feared of your foes:
We wonder much what doth your highness grieve,
That you will not unto your Lords disclose.
Perhaps you fear lest we your loyal Peers,
Would prove disloyal to your Majesty,
And be rebellious in your dying years.
But mighty Prince the heavens can testify,
Perhaps you think Mustaffa will revolt
And leave your grace, and cleave to Selimus,
But sooner shall th' almighty's thunderbolt
Strike me down to the cave tenebrious
The lowest land, and damned spirits holt
Then true Mustaffa prove so treacherous:
Your Majesty then needs not much to fear,
Since you are loved of subject, Prince, and Peer.
First shall the Sun rise from the occident,
And lose his steeds benighted in the East,
First shall the sea become the continent,
Ere we forsake our sovereign's behest:
Breaking our Lances on his sturdy crest.
We fought not for you 'gainst the Christian host,
To become traitors after all our cost.
Hear me Mustaffa and Cherseoli,
I am a father of a headstrong brood,
Which if I look not closely to myself,
Will seek to ruinate their father's state,
Even as the vipers in great Nero's fen,
Eat up the belly that first nourished them.
You see the harvest of my life is past,
And aged winter hath besprent my head,
With a hoar frost of silver colored hairs,
The harbingers of honorable old,
These branchlike veins which once did guide my arms
To toss the spear in battailous array,
Now withered up, have lost their former strength:
My sons whom now ambition 'gins to prick,
May take occasion of my weak'ned age,
And rise in rebel arms against my state.
But stay, here comes a Messenger to us.
The great commander of all Asia,
Selmi the Soldan of great Trebizond,
Sends me unto your grace, to signify
His alliance with the King of Tartary.
Said I not Lords as much to you before,
That mine own sons would seek my overthrow?
And see here comes a luckless messenger.
To prove that true, which my mind did foretell.
Does Selim make so small account of us,
That he dare matry without our consent,
And to that devil too of Tartary?
And could he then unkind, so soon forget
The injuries that Ramir did to me,
Thus to consort himself with him 'gainst me?
Your majesty misconstrues Selimus,
It cannot be, that he in whose high thoughts
A map of many valures is enshrined,
Should seek his father's ruin and decay.
Selimus is a Prince of forward hope,
Whose only name affrights your enemies,
It cannot be he should prove false to you.
Can it not be? O yes Cherseoli,
For Selimus' hands do itch to have the Crown,
And he will have it, or else pull me down.
Is he a Prince? ah no he is a sea,
Into which run nought but ambitious reaches,
Seditious complots, murder, fraud and hate.
Could he not let his father know his mind,
But match himself when I least thought on it?
Perhaps my Lord Selimus loved the dame,
And feared to certify you of his love,
Because her father was your enemy.
In love Mustaffa, Selimus in love?
If he be, Lording, 'tis not Lady's love,
But love of rule, and kingly sovereignty.
For wherefore should he fear t' ask my consent?
Truly Mustaffa, if he had feared me,
He never would have loved mine enemy.
But this his marriage with the Tartar's daughter,
Is but the prologue to his cruelty,
And quickly shall we have the Tragedy.
Which though he act with meditated bravery,
The world will never give him plaudity.
Dread Emperor, Selimus is at hand,
Two hundred thousand strong Tartarians
Armed at all points does he lead with him,
Beside his followers from Trebizond.
I thought so much of wicked Selimus,
O forlorn hopes and hapless Bajazet.
Is duty then exiled from his breast,
Which nature hath inscribed with golden pen,
Deep in the hearts of honorable men?
Ah Selim, Selim, wert thou not my son,
But some strange unacquainted foreigner,
Whom I should honor as I honored thee:
Yet would it grieve me even unto the death,
If he should deal as thou hast dealt with me.
And thou my son to whom I freely gave
The mighty Empire of great Trebizond,
Art too unnatural to requite me thus,
Good Alemshae hadst thou lived till this day,
Thou wouldst have blushed at thy brother's mind.
Come sweet Mustaffa, come Cherseoli,
And with some good advice recomfort me.
Now Selimus consider who thou art,
Long hast thou marched in disguised attire,
But now unmask thyself and play thy part,
And manifest the heat of thy desire:
Nourish the coals of thine ambitious fire.
And think that then thy Empire is most sure,
When men for fear thy tyranny endure.
Think that to thee there is no worse reproach,
Than filial duty in so high a place,
Thou oughtst to set barrels of blood abroach,
And seek with sword whole kingdoms to displace,
Let Mahound's laws be locked up in their case.
And meaner men and of a baser spirit,
In virtuous actions seek for glorious merit.
I count it sacrilege, for to be holy,
Or reverence this threadbare name of good,
Leave to old men and babes that kind of folly,
Make thou a passage for thy gushing flood,
By slaughter, treason, or what else thou can,
And scorn religion, it disgraces man.
My father Bajazet is weak and old,
And hath not much above two years to live,
The Turkish Crown of Pearl and Ophir gold,
He means to his dear Acomat to give.
But ere his ship can to her haven driven,
I'll send abroad my tempests in such sort,
That she shall sink before she get the port.
Alas, alas, his highness' aged head
Is not sufficient to support a Crown,
Then Selimus take thou it in his steed,
And if at this thy boldness he dare frown,
Or but resist thy will, then pull him down:
For since he hath so short a time t' enjoy it,
I'll make it shorter, or I will destroy him.
Nor pass I what our holy votaries
Shall here object against my forward mind,
I wreak not of their foolish ceremonies,
But mean to take my fortune as I find,
Wisdom commands to follow tide and wind:
And catch the front of swift occasion,
Before she be too quickly overgone:
Some man will say I am too impious,
Thus to lay siege against my father's life,
And that I aught to follow virtuous
And godly sons: that virtue is a glass
Wherein I may my errant life behold,
And frame myself by it in ancient mould.
Good sir, your wisdom's overflowing wit,
Digs deep with learning's wonder-working spade:
Perhaps you think that now forsooth you sit
With some grave wizard in a prattling shade.
Avant such glasses: let them view in me,
The perfect picture of right tyranny.
Ay, like a Lion's look not worth a leek,
When every dog deprives him of his prey:
These honest terms are far enough to seek.
When angry Fortune menaceth decay,
My resolution treads a nearer way.
Give me the heart conspiring with the hand,
In such a cause my father to withstand.
Is he my father? why I am his son:
I owe no more to him than he to me,
If he proceed as he hath now begun,
And pass from me the Turkish Signiory,
To Acomat, then Selimus is free:
And if he injure me that am his son,
Faith all the love 'twixt him and me is done.
But for I see the schoolmen are prepared,
To plant 'gainst me their bookish ordinance,
I mean to stand on a sententious guard:
And without any far fetched circumstance,
Quickly unfold mine own opinion,
To arm my heart with irreligion.
When first this circled round, this building fair,
Some God took out of the confused mass,
(What God I do not know, nor greatly care)
Then every man of his own dition was,
And every one his life in peace did pass.
War was not then, and riches were not known,
And no man said, this, or this is mine own,
The ploughman with a furrow did not mark
How far his great possessions did reach:
The earth knew not the share, nor seas the bark.
The soldiers ent'red not the batt'red breach,
Nor Trumpets the tantara loud did teach.
There needed them no judge nor yet no law,
Nor any King of whom to stand in awe.
But after Ninus, warlike Belus' son,
The earth with unknown armor did wary,
Then first the sacred name of King begun:
And things that were as common as the day,
Did then to set possessors first obey.
Then they established laws and holy rites,
To maintain peace, and govern bloody fights.
Then some sage man, above the vulgar wise,
Knowing that laws could not in quiet dwell,
Unless they were observed: did first devise
The names of Gods, religion, heaven, and hell,
And gan of pains, and famed rewards to tell.
Pains for those men which did neglect the law,
Rewards, for those that lived in quiet awe.
Whereas indeed they were mere fictions,
And if they were not Selim thinks they were:
And these religion's observations,
Only bugbears to keep the world in fear,
And make men quietly a yoke to bear.
So that religion of itself a babble,
Was only found to make us peaceable.
Hence in especial come the foolish names,
Of father, mother, brother, and such like:
For who so well his cogitation frames,
Shall find they serve but only for to strike
Into our minds a certain kind of love.
For these names too are but a policy,
To keep the quiet of society.
Indeed I must confess they are not bad,
Because they keep the baser sort in fear:
But we, whose mind in heavenly thoughts is clad,
Whose body doth a glorious spirit bear,
That hath no bounds, but flieth everywhere.
Why should we seek to make that soul a slave,
To which dame Nature so large freedom gave.
Amongst us men, there is some difference,
Of actions rearmed by us good or ill:
As he that doth his father recompense,
Differs from him that doth his father kill.
And yet I think think other what they will,
That Parricides, when death hath given them rest,
And that's just nothing, for as I suppose
In death's void kingdom reigns eternal night:
Secure of evil, and secure of foes,
Where nothing doth the wicked man affright,
No more than him that die in doing right.
Then since in death nothing shall to us fall,
Here while I live, I'll have a snatch at all.
And that can never, never be attained,
Unless old Bajazet do die the death:
For long enough the greybeard now hath reigned,
And lived at ease, while others lived uneath.
And now it's time he should resign his breath.
'Twere good for him if he were pressed out,
'Twould bring him rest, and rid him of his gout.
Resolved to do it, cast to compass it
Without delay or long procrastination:
It argueth an unmannered wit,
When all is ready for so strong invasion,
To draw out time, an unlooked-for mutation
May soon prevent us if we do delay,
Quick speed is good, Where wisdom leads the way.
Lo fly boy to my father Bajazet,
And tell him Selim his obedient son,
Desires to speak with him and kiss his hands,
Tell him I long to see his gracious face,
And that I come with all my chivalry,
To chase the Christians from his Signiory:
In any wise say I must speak with him.
Now Sinam if I speed. What then my Lord?
What then? why Sinam thou art nothing worth,
I will endeavor to persuade him man,
To give the Empire over unto me,
Perhaps I shall attain it at his hands:
If I cannot, this right hand is resolved,
To end the period with a fatal stab.
My gracious Lord, give Sinam leave to speak,
If you resolve to work your father's death,
You venture life: think you the Janissaries
Will suffer you to kill him in their sight,
And let you pass free without punishment?
If I resolve? as sure as heaven is heaven,
I mean to see him dead, or myself King:
As for the Bassas they are all my friends,
And I am sure would pawn their dearest blood,
That Selim might be Emperor of Turks.
Yet Acomat and Corcut both survive,
To be revenged for their father's death.
Sinam if they or twenty such as they,
Had twenty several Armies in the field,
If Selimus were once your Emperor,
I'd dart abroad the thunderbolts of war,
And mow their heartless squadrons to the ground.
O yet my Lord after your highness' death,
There is a hell and a revenging God.
Tush, Sinam these are school conditions,
To fear the devil or his cursed dam:
Thinkst thou I care for apparitions,
Of Sisyphus and of his backward stone,
And poor Ixion's lamentable moan?
Now I think the cave of damned ghosts,
Is but a tale to terrify young babes:
Like devils' faces scored on painted posts,
Or feigned circles in our astrolabes.
Why there's no difference when we are dead,
And death once come, then all alike are sped.
Or if there were, as I can scarce believe,
A heaven of joy, and hell of endless pain:
Yet by my soul it never should me grieve:
So I might on the Turkish Empire reign,
To enter hell, and lean on fair heaven's gain.
An Empire Sinam, is so sweet a thing,
As I could be a devil to be a King.
But go we Lords and solace in our camp,
Till the return of young Occhiali,
And if his answer be to thy desire,
Selim thy mind in kingly thoughts attire.
Even as the great Egyptian Crocodile,
Wanting his prey, with artificial tears,
And feigned plaints his subtle tongue doth file,
T' entrap the silly wand'ring traveler,
And move him to advance his footing near,
That when he is in danger of his claws,
He may devour him with his famished jaws,
So playeth crafty Selimus with me,
His haughty thoughts still wait on Diadems,
And not a step but treads to majesty.
The Phoenix gazeth on the Sun's bright beams,
The Echeneis swims against the streams.
Nought but the Turkish sceptre can him please,
And there I know lieth his chief disease.
He sends his messenger to crave access,
And says he longs to kiss my aged hands:
But howsoever he in show profess,
His meaning with his words but weakly stands.
And sooner will the Syrtis' boiling sands,
Become a quiet road for fleeting ships,
Then Selimus' heart agree with Selim's lips.
Too well I know the Crocodile's feigned tears,
Which who so moved with foolish pity hears,
Will be the author of his own decay.
Then hie thee Bajazet from hence away:
A fawning monster is false Selimus,
Whose fairest words are most pernicious.
Young man, would Selim come and speak with us?
What is his message to us, canst thou tell?
He craves my Lord, another signiory,
Nearer to you and to the Christians,
That he may make them know, that Selimus
Is born to be a scourge unto them all.
He's born to be a scourge to me and mine,
He never would have come with such an host,
Unless he meant my state to undermine,
What though in word he bravely seem to boast,
The foraging of all the Christian coast?
Yet we have cause to fear when burning brands,
Are vainly given into a madman's hands.
Well I must seem to wink at his desire,
Although I see it plainer than the light,
My lenity adds fuel to his fire,
Which now begins to break in flashing bright,
Then Bajazet chastise his stubborn sprite.
Lest these small sparkles grow to such a flame,
As shall consume thee and thy house's name.
Alas I spare when all my store is gone,
And thrust my fickle where the corn is reaped,
In vain I send for the physician,
When on the patient is his grave dust heaped.
In vain, now all his veins in venom slept
Break out in blisters that will poison us,
We seek to give him an Antidote.
He that will stop the brook, must then begin
When summer's heat hath dried up his spring,
And when his pittering streams are low and thin,
For let the winter aid unto him bring,
He grows to be of wat'ry floods the King.
And though you dam him up with lofty ranks,
Yet will he quickly overflow his banks.
Messenger, go and tell young Selimus,
We give to him all great Samandria,
Bordering on Bulgrade of Hungaria,
Where he may plague those Christian runnages,
And salve the wounds that they have given our states,
A royal present for my Selimus,
And tell him messenger another time
He shall have talk enough with Bajazet.
And now what counsel gives Mustaffa to us?
I fear this hasty reckoning will undo us.
Make haste my Lord from Andrinople walls,
And let us fly to fair Byzantium,
lest if your son before you take the town,
He may with little labor win the crown.
Then do so good Mustaffa, call our guard,
And gather all our warlike Janissaries,
Our chiefest aid is swift celerity,
Then let our winged coursers tread the wind,
And leave rebellious Selimus behind.
And is his answer so, Occhiali?
Is Selim such a corrosive to his heart,
That he cannot endure the sight of him?
Forsooth he gives thee all Samandria,
From whence our mighty Emperor Mahomet,
Was driven to his country back with shame.
No doubt thy father loves thee Selimus,
To make thee Regent of so great a land,
Which is not yet his own: or if it were,
What dangers wait on him that should it steer.
Here the Polonian he comes hurtling in,
Under the conduct of some foreign prince,
To fight in honor of his crucifix!
Here the Hungarian with his bloody cross,
Deals blows about to win Belgrade again.
And after all, forsooth Basilius
The mighty Emperor of Russia,
Sends in his troops of slave-borne Muscovites,
And he will share with us, or else take all.
In giving such a land so full of strife,
His meaning is to rid me of my life.
Now by the dreaded name of Termagant,
And by the blackest brook in loathsome hell,
Since he is so unnatural to me,
I will prove as unnatural as he.
Thinks he to stop my mouth with gold or pearl?
Or rusty jades fetched from Barbaria?
No let his minion his philosopher,
Corcut and Acomat be enriched with them.
I will not take my rest, till this right hand
Hath pulled the Crown from off his coward's head,
And on the ground his bastard's gore-blood shed:
Nor shall his flight to old Byzantium,
Dismay my thoughts which never learned to stoup.
March Sinam, march in order after him:
Were his light steeds as swift as Pegasus,
And trod the airy pavement with their heals,
Yet Selimus would overtake them soon.
And though the heavens do ne'er so crossly frown,
In spite of heaven shall Selim wear the crown.
Is this thy duty son unto thy father,
So impiously to level at his life?
Can thy soul wallowing in ambitious mire,
Seek for to reave that breast with bloody knife,
From whence thou hadst thy being Selimus?
Was this the end for which thou join'st thyself,
With that mischievous traitor Ramirchan?
Was this thy drift to speak with Bajazet?
Well hoped I (but hope I see is vain)
Thou wouldst have been a comfort to mine age,
A scourge and terror to mine enemies,
That this thy coming with so great an host,
Was for no other purpose and intent,
Then for to chastise those base Christians
Which spoil my subjects' wealth with fire and sword
Well hoped I the rule of Trebizond,
Would have increased the valor of thy mind,
To turn thy strength upon thy Persians.
But thou like to a crafty Polipus,
Dost turn thy hungry jaws upon thyself,
For what am I Selimus but thyself?
When courage first crept in thy manly breast,
And thou began'st to rule the martial sword,
How oft said thou the sun should change his course,
Water should turn to earth, and earth to heaven,
Ere thou wouldst prove disloyal to thy father.
O Titan turn thy breathless coursers back,
And enterprise thy journey from the East.
Blush Selim that the world should say of thee,
That by my death thou gain'st the Empery.
Now let my cause be pleaded Bajazet,
For father I disdain to call thee now:
I took not Arms to seize upon thy crown,
For that if once thou hadst been laid in grave,
Should sit upon the head of Selimus
I took not Arms to take away thy life,
The remnant of thy days is but a span,
And foolish had I been to enterprise
That which the gout and death would do for me.
I took not arms to shed my brother's blood,
Because they stop my passage to the crown.
For while thou liv'st Selimus is content
That they should live, but when thou once art dead
Which of them both dares Selimus withstand?
I soon should hew their bodies in piecemeal,
As easy as a man would kill a gnat.
But I took arms unkind to honor thee,
And win again the fame that thou hast lost.
And thou thought'st scorn Selim should speak with thee.
But had it been your darling Acomat,
You would have met him half the way yourself.
I am a Prince, and though your younger son,
Yet are my merits better then both their's:
But you do seek to disinherit me,
And mean t' invest Acomat with your crown.
So he shall have a prince's due reward,
That cannot show a scar received in field,
We that have fought with mighty Prester John,
And stripped th' Egyptian soldan of his camp,
Venturing life and living to honor thee,
For that same cause shall now dishonored be.
Art thou a father? Nay false Bajazet
Disclaim the title which thou dost not merit.
A father would not thus flee from his son,
As thou dost fly from loyal Selimus.
A father would not injure thus his son,
As thou dost injure loyal Selimus.
Then Bajazet prepare thee to the fight,
Selimus once thy son, but now thy foe,
And since thou fear'st as long as I do live,
I'll also fear, as long as thou dost live.
My heart is overwhelmed with fear and grief,
What dismal Comet blazed at my birth,
Whose influence makes my strong unbridled sons
Instead of love to render hate to me?
Ah Bassas if that ever heretofore
Your Emperor aught his safety unto you,
Defend me now 'gainst my unnatural son:
Yield thee Tartarian, or thou shalt die,
Upon my sword's sharp point standeth pale death
Ready to rive in two thy caitive breast.
Art thou that knight that like a lion fierce,
Tiring his stomach on a flock of lambs,
Hast broke our ranks and put them clean to flight?
Ay, and unless thou look unto thyself,
This sword ne'er drunk in the Tartarian blood,
Shall make thy carcass as the outcast dung.
Nay, I have matched a braver knight than you,
Strong Alemshae thy master's eldest son,
Leaving his body naked on the plains,
And Turk, the selfsame end for thee remains.
Shall Selim's hope be buried in the dust?
And Bajazet triumph over his fall?
Then o thou blindful mistress of mishap,
Chief patroness of Rhamus' golden gates,
I will advance my strong revenging hand,
And pluck thee from thy ever-turning wheel.
Mars, or Minerva, Mahound, Termagant,
Or whosoe'er you are that fight 'gainst me,
Come and but show yourselves before my face,
And I will rend you all like trembling reeds.
Well, Bajazet, though Fortune smile on thee,
And deck thy camp with glorious victory,
Though Selimus now conquered by thee,
Is fain to put his safety in swift flight:
Yet so he flies, that like an angry ram,
He'll turn more fiercely than before he came.
Thus have we gained a bloody victory,
And though we are the masters of the field,
Yet have we lost more than our enemies:
Ah luckless fault of my Cherseoli,
As dear and dearer wert thou unto me,
Than any of my sons, than mine own self.
When I was glad, thy heart was full of joy,
And bravely hast thou died for Bajazet.
And though thy bloodless body here do lie,
Yet thy sweet soul in heaven forever blessed,
Among the stars enjoys eternal rest.
What art thou warlike man of Tartary,
Whose hap it is to be our prisoner?
I am a prince, Ottrante is my name,
Chief captain of the Tartars' mighty host.
Ottrante? Wast not thou that slew my son?
Ay, and if fortune had but favored me,
Had sent the sire to keep him company.
Off with his head and spoil him of his Arms,
And leave his body for the airy birds.
The unrevenged ghost of Alemshae,
Shall now no more wander on Stygian banks,
But rest in quiet in th' Elysian fields.
Mustaffa, and you worthy men at Arms,
That left not Bajazet in greatest need,
When we arrive at Constantine's great Tow'r,
You shall be honored of your Emperor.
Perhaps you wonder why prince Acomat,
Delighting heretofore in foolish love,
Hath changed his quiet to a soldier's state:
And turned the dulcet tunes of Hymen's song,
Into Bellona's horrible outcries,
You think it strange, that whereas I have lived,
Almost a votary to wantonness,
To see me low lay off effeminate robes,
And arm my body in an iron wall.
I have enjoyed quiet long enough,
And surfeited with pleasure's surquedry
A field of dainties I have passed through,
And be a champion to fair Cytheree.
Now since this idle peace hath wearied me,
I'll follow Mars and war another while,
And dye my shield in dolorous vermeil.
My brother Selim through his manly deeds,
Hath lifted up his fame unto the skies,
While we like earth-worms lurking in the weeds,
Do live inglorious in all men's eyes.
What lets me then from this vain slumber rise,
And by strong hand achieve eternal glory,
That may be talked of in all memory?
And see how fortune favors mine intent,
Heard you not Lordings, how prince Selimus
Against our royal father armed went,
And how the Janissaries made him flee
To Ramir Emperor of Tartary?
This his rebellion greatly profits me,
For I shall sooner win my father's mind,
Which if I have, I am sure I shall find
Strong enemies to pull me down again,
That fain would have prince Selimus to reign.
Then civil discord, and contentious war,
Will follow Acomat's coronation.
Selim no doubt will broach seditious jar,
And Corcut too will seek for alteration,
Now to prevent all sudden perturbation,
We thought it good to muster up our power,
That danger may not take it unprovided.
I like your highness' resolution well,
For these should be the chief arts of a king,
To punish those that furiously rebel,
And honor those that sacred counsel bring,
To make good laws, ill customs to expel:
To nourish peace from whence your riches spring,
And when good quarrels call you to the field,
T' excel your men in handling spear and shield.
Thus shall the glory of your matchless name,
Be regist'red up in immortal lines:
Whereas that prince that follows lustful game,
And to fond toys his captive mind inclines,
Shall never pass the temple of true fame,
Whose worth is greater than the Indian mines.
But is your grace assured certainly
That Bajazet doth favor your request?
Perhaps you may make him your enemy,
You know how much your father doth detest,
Stout obedience and obstinacy.
I speak not this as if I thought it best:
Your highness should your right in it neglect,
But that you might be close and circumspect.
We thank thee Visir for thy loving care,
As for my father Bajazet's affection,
Unless his holy vows forgotten are,
I shall be sure of it by his election.
By after Acomat's erection,
We must forecast what things be necessary,
lest that our kingdom be too momentary.
First let my Lord be seated in his throne,
Installed by great Bajazet's consent,
As yet your harvest is not fully grown,
But in the green and unripe blade is penned:
But when you once have got the regiment,
Then may your Lords more easily provide,
Against all accidents that may betide.
Then set we forward to Byzantium,
That we may know what Bajazet intends.
Advise thee Acomat, what's best to do,
The Janissaries favor Selimus,
And they are strong undaunted enemies,
Which will in Arms 'gainst thy election rise.
Then will them to thy will with precious gifts,
And store of gold: timely largition
The steadfast persons from their purpose lifts:
But then beware lest Bajazet's affection
Change into hatred by such premonition.
For then he think that I am factious,
And imitate my brother Selimus.
Beside, a prince his honor doth debase,
That begs the common soldiers' suffrages,
And if the Bassas knew I sought their grace,
It would the more increase their insolentness.
To resist them were over hardiness,
And worse it were to leave my enterprise.
Well howsoe'er, resolve to venture it,
Fortune doth favor every bold assay,
And 'twere a trick of an unsettled wit
Because the bees have stings with them alway,
To fare our mouths in honey to embay.
Then resolution for me leads the dance,
And thus resolved, I mean to try my chance.
What prince soe'er, trusts to his mighty pow'r,
Ruling the reins of many nations,
And feareth not least fickle fortune lour,
Ar thinks his kingdom free from alterations,
If he were in the place of Bajazet,
He would but little by his sceptre set.
For what hath rule that makes it acceptable,
Rather what hath it not worthy of hate:
First of all is our state still mutable,
And our continuance at the people's rate,
So that it is a slender thread, whereon
Depends the honor of a prince's throne.
Then do we fear, more than the child new born,
Our friends, our Lords, our subjects, and our sons.
Thus is our mind in sundry pieces torn
By care, by fear, suspicion, and distrust,
In wine, in meat we fear pernicious poison,
At home, abroad, we fear seditious treason.
Too true that tyrant Dionysius
Did picture out the image of a King,
When Daniocles was placed in his throne,
And o'er his head a threat'ning sword did hang,
Fast'ned up only by a horse's hair.
Our chiefest trust is secretly distrust,
For whom have we whom we may safely trust,
If our own sons, neglecting awful duty,
Rise up in Arms against their loving father's.
Their heart is all of hardest marble wrought,
That can lay wait to take away their breath,
From whom they first sucked this vital air.
My heart is heavy, and I needs must sleep.
Bassas withdraw yourselves from me awhile,
That I may rest my overburd'ned soul.
They stand aside while the curtains are drawn.
Eunuchs play me some music while I sleep.
Good Bajazet, who would not pity thee,
Whom thine own son so vildly persecutes.
More mildly do th' unreasonablest beasts
Deal with their dams, than Selimus with thee.
Mustaffa we are princes of the land,
And love our Emperor as well as thou:
Yet will we not for pitying his estate,
Suffer our foes our wealth to ruinate.
If Selim have played false with Bajazet,
And overslipped the duty of a son,
Why he was moved by just occasion.
Did he not humbly send his messenger
To crave access unto his majesty?
And yet he could not get permission
To kiss his hands, and speak his mind to him.
Perhaps he thought his aged father's love
Was clean estranged from him: and Acomat
Should reap the fruit that he had labored for.
'Tis lawful for the father to take Arms,
Ay and by death chastise his rebel son.
Why should it be unlawful for the son,
To levy Arms 'gainst his injurious sire?
You reason Hali like a sophister.
As if 'twere lawful for a subject prince
Because he will not let him have his will:
Much less is't lawful for a man's own son.
If Bajazet had injured Selimus,
Or sought his death, or done him some abuse,
Then Selimus' cause had been more tolerable.
But Bajazet did never injure him,
Nor sought his death, nor once abused him,
Unless because he gives him not the crown,
Being the youngest of his highness' sons.
Gave he not him and Empire for his part,
The mighty Empire of great Trebizond?
So that if all things rightly be observed,
Selim had more then ever he deserved.
I speak not this because I hate the prince,
For by the heavens I love young Selimus,
Better than either of his brethren.
But for I owe allegiance to my king,
And love him much that favors me so much.
Mustaffa, while old Bajazet doth live,
Will be as true to him as to himself.
Why brave Mustaffa, Hali and myself
Were never false unto his majesty.
Our father Hali died in the field,
Against the Sophi, in his highness' wars.
And we will never be degenerate.
Nor do we take part with prince Selimus,
Because we would depose old Bajazet,
But for because we would not Acomat
That leads his life still in lascivious pomp,
Nor Corcut, though he be a man of worth,
Should be commander of our Empire.
For he that never saw his foeman's face,
But always slept upon a Lady's lap,
Will scant endure to lead a soldier's life.
And he that never handled but his pen,
Will be unskillful at the warlike lance.
Indeed his wisdom well may guide the crown,
And keep that safe his predecessors got:
But being given to peace as Corcut is,
He never will enlarge the Empire:
So that the rule and power over us,
Is only fit for valiant Selimus.
Princes, you know how mighty Bajazet
Hath honored Mustaffa with his love.
He gave his daughter beauteous Solima,
To be the sovereign mistress of my thoughts.
He made me captain of the Janissaries,
And too unnatural should Mustaffa be,
To rise against him in his dying age.
Yet know, you warlike peer, Mustaffa is
A loyal friend unto prince Selimus,
And ere his other brothers get the crown,
For his sake, I myself will pull them down.
I love, I love them dearly, but the love
Which I do bear unto my country's good,
Makes me a friend to noble Selimus,
Only let Bajazet while he doth live,
Enjoy in peace the Turkish Diadem.
When he is dead, and laid in quiet grave,
Then none but Selimus our help shall have.
How now Mustaffa, what news have we there?
Is Selim up in Arms 'gainst me again?
Or is the Sophi ent'red our confines?
Hath the Egyptian snatched his crown again?
Or have the uncontrolled Christians
Unsheathed their swords to make more war on us?
Such news, or none will come to Bajazet.
My gracious Lord, here's an Ambassador
Come from your son the Soldan Acomat.
From Acomat? O let him enter in.
Ambassador, how fares our loving son?
Mighty commander of the warlike Turks,
Acomat Soldan of Amasia,
Greeteth your grace by me his messenger.
And gratulates your highness good success,
Wishing good fortune may befall you still.
Acomat craves thy promise Bajazet,
To give the Empire up into his hands,
And make it sure to him in thy lifetime.
And thou shalt have it lovely Acomat,
For I have been encumb'red long enough,
And vexed with the cares of kingly rule,
Now let the trouble of the Empery
Be buried in the bosom of thy son.
Ah Acomat, if thou have such a reign
So full of sorrow as thy father's was,
Thou wilt accurse the time, the day and hour,
In which thou was established Emperor.
Long live the mighty Emperor Bajazet,
Corcut the Soldan of Magnesia,
Hearing of Selim's worthy overthrow,
And of the coming of young Acomat,
Doth certify your majesty by me,
How joyful he is of your victory.
And therewithal he humbly doth require
Your grace would do him justice in his cause.
His brethren both, unworthy such a father,
Do seek the Empire while your grace doth live,
And that by undirect sinister means.
But Corcut's mind free from ambitious thoughts,
And trusting to the goodness of his cause,
Joined unto your highness' tender love,
Only desires your grace should not invest
Selim nor Acomat, in the Diadem,
Which appertaineth unto him by right,
But keep it to yourself the while you live:
And when it shall the great creator please,
Who hath the spirits of all men in his hands,
Shall call your highness to your latest home,
Then will he also sue to have his right.
Whom waves do toss one way and winds another,
Both without ceasing: even so my poor heart
Endures a combat betwixt love and right.
The love I bear to my dear Acomat,
Commands me give my suffrage unto him,
But Corcut's title, being my eldest son,
Bids me recall my hand, and give it him.
Acomat, he would have it in my life,
But gentle Corcut like a loving son,
Desires me live and die an Emperor,
And at my death bequeath my crown to him.
Ah Corcut thou I see lov'st me indeed,
Selimus sought to thrust me down by force,
And Acomat seeks the kingdom in my life,
And both of them are grieved thou liv'st so long.
But Corcut numb'reth not my days as they,
O how much dearer loves he me than they.
Bassas, how counsel you your Emperor?
My gracious Lord, myself will speak for all,
For all I know are minded as I am.
Your highness knows the Janissaries love,
How firm they mean to cleave to your behest,
As well you might perceive in that sad fight,
When Selim set upon you in your flight.
Then we do all desire you on our knees,
To keep the crown and sceptre to yourself.
How grievous will it be unto your thoughts,
If you should give the crown to Acomat,
To see the brothers disinherited,
To flesh their anger one upon another,
And rend the bowels of this mighty reign.
Suppose that Corcut would be well content,
Yet thinks your grace if Acomat were king,
That Selim ere long would join league with him?
Nay he would break from forth his Trebizond,
And waste the Empire all with fire and sword.
Ah then too weak would be poor Acomat,
Or save himself from his enhanced hand.
While Ismael and the cruel Persians,
And the great Soldan of th' Egyptians,
Would smile to see our force dismemb'red so,
I and perchance the neighbor Christians
Would take occasion to thrust out their heads.
All this may be prevented by your grace,
If you will yield to Corcut's just request,
And keep the kingdom to you while you live,
Mean time we that your grace's subjects are,
May make us strong, to fortify the man,
Who at your death your grace shall choose as king.
O how thou speakest ever like thyself,
Loyal Mustaffa: well were Bajazet
If all his sons, did bear such love to him.
Though loath I am longer to wear the crown,
Yet for I see it is my subjects' will,
Once more will Bajazet be Emperor.
But we must send to pacify our son,
Or he will storm, as erst did Selimus.
Come let us go unto our council Lord,
And there consider what is to be done.
Thus will I rend the crown from off thy head,
False-hearted and injurious Bajazet,
To mock thy son that loved thee so dear.
What? for because the headstrong Janissaries
Would not consent to honor Acomat,
And their base Bassas vowed to Selimus,
Thought me unworthy of the Turkish crown,
Should he be ruled and overruled by them,
Under pretense of keeping it himself,
To wipe me clean for ever being king?
Doth he esteem so much the Bassas words,
And prize their favor at so high a rate,
That for to gratify their stubborn minds,
He casts away all care, and all respects
Of duty, promise, and religious oaths?
Now by the holy Prophet Mahomet,
Chief president and patron of the Turks,
I mean to challenge now my right by Arms,
And win by sword that glorious dignity
Which he injuriously detains from me.
Haply he thinks because that Selimus
Rebutted by his warlike Janissaries,
Was fain to fly in haste from whence he came:
That Acomat by his example moved,
Will fear to manage Arms against his sire.
Or that my life forepassed in pleasure's court,
Promises weak resistance in the fight:
But he shall know that I can use my sword,
And like a lion seize upon my prey.
If ever Selim moved him heretofore,
Acomat means to move him ten times more.
'Twere good your grace would to Amasia,
And there increase your camp with fresh supply.
Visir, I am impatient of delay,
And since my father hath incensed me thus,
I'll quench those kindled flames with his heart blood.
Not like a son, but a most cruel foe,
Will Acomat henceforth be unto him.
March to Natolia, there we will begin
And make a preface to our massacres.
My nephew Mahomet son to Alemshae,
Departed lately from Iconium,
Is lodged there, and he shall be the first
Whom I will sacrifice unto my wrath.
Lord Governor, what think you best to do?
If we receive the Soldan Acomat,
Who knoweth not but his bloodthirsty sword
Shall be embowelled in our countrymen.
You know he is displeased with Bajazet,
And will rebel, as Selim did to before,
And would to God with Selim's overthrow.
You know his angry heart hath vowed revenge
On all the subjects of his father's land.
Young prince, thy uncle seeks to have thy life,
Because by right the Turkish crown is thine,
Save thou thyself by flight or otherwise,
And we will make resistance as we can.
Like an Armenian tiger, that hath lost
Her loved whelps, so raveth Acomat:
But you may live to venge your citizens.
Then fly good prince before your uncle come.
Nay good my Lord, never shall it be said
That Mahomet the son of Alemshae,
Fled from his citizens for fear of death,
But I will stay, and help to fight for you,
And if you needs must die, I'll die with you.
And I among the rest with forward hand,
Will help to kill a common enemy.
Now fair Natolia, shall thy stately walls
Be overthrown and beaten to the ground.
My heart within me for revenge still calls.
Why Bajazet, thought'st thou that Acomat
Would put up such a monstrous injury?
Then had I brought my chivalry in vain,
And to no purpose drawn my conquering blade,
Which now unsheathed, shall not be sheathed again,
Till it a world of bleeding souls hath made.
Poor Mahomet, thou thought'st thyself too sure,
In thy strong city of Iconium,
To plant thy Forces in Natolia,
Weakened so much before by Selim's sword.
Summon a parley to the citizens,
That they may hear the dreadful words I speak,
And die in thought before they come to blows.
What craves our uncle Acomat of us?
That thou and all the city yield themselves,
Or by the holy rites of Mahomet
His wondrous tomb, and sacred Alcoran,
You all shall die: and not a common death,
But even as monstrous as I can devise.
Uncle, if I may call you by that name,
Which cruelly hunt for your nephew's blood,
You do us wrong thus to besiege our town,
That never deserved such hatred at your hands,
Being your friends and kinsmen as we are.
In that thou wrong'st me that thou art my kinsman.
Why for I am thy nephew dost thou frown?
Ay that thou art so near unto the crown.
Why uncle I resign my right to thee,
And all my title were it ne'er so good.
Wilt thou? then know assuredly from me,
I'll seal the resignation with thy blood:
Though Alemshae thy father loved me well,
Yet Mahomet thy son shall down to hell.
Why uncle doth my life put you in fear?
It shall not nephew, since I have you here.
When I am dead, mote hinderers shalt thou find.
When one's cut off, the fewer are behind.
Yet think the gods do bear an equal eye.
Faith if they all were squint-eyed, what care I.
Then Mahomet know we will rather die,
Then yield us up into a tyrant's hand.
Beshrew me but you be the wiser Mahomet,
For if I do but catch you boy alive
'Twere better for you run through Phlegiton.
Sirs, scale the walls, and pull the caitiff's down,
I give to you the spoil of all the town.
Now youngster, you that bravedst us on the walls,
And shook your plumed crest against our shield,
What would'st thou give, or what would'st thou not give,
That thou wert far enough from Acomat?
How like the villain is to Bajazet?
Well nephew for thy father loved me well,
I will not deal extremely with his son:
Then hear a brief compendium of thy death.
Regan go cause a grove of steelhead spears,
Be pitched thick under the castle wall,
And on them let this youthful captain fall.
Thou shalt not fear me Acomat with death,
Nor will I beg my pardon at thy hands.
But as thou giv'st me such a monstrous death,
So do I freely leave to thee my curse:
O, that will serve to fill my father's purse.
Ah pardon me dear uncle, pardon me.
No minion, you are too near a kin to me.
If ever pity entered thy breast,
Or ever thou wast touched with woman's love,
Sweet uncle spare wretched Zonara's life.
Thou once wast noted for a quiet prince,
Soft-hearted, mild, and gentle as a lamb,
Ah do not prove a lion unto me.
Why would'st thou live, when Mahomet is dead?
Ah who slew Mahomet? Uncle did you?
He that's prepared to do as much for you.
Dost thou not pity Alemshae in me?
Yes that he wants so long thy company.
Thou art not false groom son to Bajazet,
He would relent to hear a woman weep,
But thou wast born in desert Caucasus,
And the Hyrcanian tigers gave thee suck,
Knowing thou wert a monster like themselves.
Let you her thus to rate us? Strangle her.
Now scour the streets, and leave not one alive
To carry these sad news to Bajazet.
That all the citizens may dearly say,
This day was fatal to Natolia.
Mustaffa, if my mind deceive me not,
Some strange misfortune is not far from me.
I was not wont to tremble in this sort.
Methinks I feel a cold run through my bones,
As if it hast'ned to surprise my heart,
Methinks some voice still whispereth in my ears
And bids me to take heed of Acomat.
'Tis but your highness' overcharged mind
Which fears most the things it least desires.
Ah sweet Mustaffa, thou art much deceived,
My mind presages me some future harm,
And lo what doleful exequy is here.
Our chief commander of Natolia?
What caitive hand is it hath wounded thee?
And who are these covered in tomb-black hearse?
These are thy nephews mighty Bajazet,
The son and daughter of good Alemshae,
Whom cruel Acomat hath murd'red thus.
These eyes beheld, when from an airy tour,
They hurled the body of young Mahomet,
Whereas a band of armed soldiers,
Received him falling on their spears' sharp points.
Entreating life and not obtaining it,
Was strangled by his barbarous soldiers.
O you dispensers of our hapless breath,
Why do you glut your eyes, and take delight
To see sad pageants of men's misery's?
Wherefore have you prolonged my wretched life,
To see my son my dearest Acomat,
To lift his hands against his father's life?
Ah Selimus, now do I pardon thee,
For thou didst set upon me manfully,
And moved by an occasion, though unjust.
But Acomat, injurious Acomat,
Is ten times more unnatural to me.
Hapless Zonara, hapless Mahomet,
The poor remainder of my Alemshae,
Which of you both shall Bajazet most wail?
Ah both of you are worthy to be wailed.
Happily dealt the froward fates with thee,
Good Alemshae, for thou didst die in field,
And so preventedst this sad spectacle,
Pitiful spectacle of sad dreariment,
Pitiful spectacle of dismal death.
But I have lived to see thee Alemshae,
By Tartar Pirates all in pieces torn.
To see young Selim's disobedience.
To see the death of Alemshae's poor seed.
And last of all to see my Acomat
Prove a rebellious enemy to me.
Ah cease your tears unhappy Emperor,
And shed not all for your poor nephew's death.
Six thousand of true-hearted citizens
In fair Natolia, Acomat hath slain:
The channels run like riverets of blood,
And I escaped with this poor compander,
Bemangled and dismemb'red as you see,
To be the messenger of these sad news.
And now mine eyes fast swimming in pale death,
Bids me resign my breath unto the heavens,
Farewell dear Emperor and revenge our loss,
As ever thou dost hope for happiness. 
Avernus' jaws and loathsome Taenarus,
From whence the damned ghosts do often creep,
Back to the world to punish wicked men.
Black Demogorgon, grandfather of night,
Send out thy furies from thy fiery hall,
The pitiless Erymnes armed with whips,
And all the damned monsters of black hell,
To pour their plagues on cursed Acomat.
How shall I mourn, or which way shall I turn
To pour my tears upon my dearest friends?
Couldst thou endue false-hearted Acomat,
To kill thy nephew and thy sister thus,
And wound to death so valiant a Lord?
And will you not you all-beholding heavens,
Dart down on him your piercing lightning brand,
Enrolled in sulfur, and consuming flames?
Ah do not Jove, Acomat is my son,
And may perhaps by counsel be reclaimed,
And brought to filial obedience.
Aga thou art a man of persant wit,
Go thou and talk with my son Acomat,
And see if he will any way relent.
Speak him fair Aga, lest he kill thee too.
And we my Lords will in, and mourn a while,
Over these princes' lamentable tombs.
As Titus in the country of the dead,
With restless cries doth call upon high Jove,
The while the vulture tireth on his heart,
So Acomat, revenge still gnaws thy soul.
I think my soldiers' hands have been too slow,
In shedding blood, and murd'ring innocents.
I think my wrath hath been too patient,
Since civil blood quenches not out the flames
Which Bajazet hath kindled in my heart.
My gracious Lord, here is a messenger
Let him come in: Aga what news with you?
Great Prince, thy father mighty Bajazet,
Wonders your grace whom he did love so much,
And thought to leave possessor of the crown,
Would thus requite his love with mortal hate,
To kill thy nephews with revenging sword,
And massacre his subjects in such sort.
Aga, my father traitorous Bajazet,
Detains the crown injuriously from me,
Which I will have if all the world say nay.
I am not like the unmanured land,
Which answers not his honor's greedy mind:
I sow not seeds upon the barren sand,
A thousand ways can Acomat soon find,
To gain my will, which if I cannot gain,
Then purple blood my angry hands shall stain.
That hasty purposes have hated ends.
Tush Aga, Selim was not wise enough
To set upon the head at the first brunt:
He should have done as I do mean to do,
Fill all the confines, with fire, sword, and blood.
Burn up the fields, and overthrow whole towns,
And when he had endamaged that way,
The tear the old man piecemeal with my teeth,
And color my strong hands with his gore-blood.
Oh see my Lord, how fell ambition
Deceives your senses and bewitches you,
Could you unkind perform so foul a deed,
As kill the man, that first gave life to you?
Do you not fear the people's adverse fame?
It is the greatest glory of a king
When, though his subjects hate his wicked deeds
Yet are they forced to bear them all with praise.
Whom fear constrains to praise their prince's deeds,
That fear, eternal hatred in them feeds.
He knows not how to sway the kingly mace,
That loves to be great in his people's grace:
The surest ground for kings to build upon,
Is to be feared and cursed of everyone.
Hate is peculiar to a prince's state.
Where there's no shame, no care of holy law,
No faith, no justice, no integrity,
That state is full of mutability.
Bare faith, pure virtue, poor integrity,
Are ornaments fit for a private man,
Beseems a prince for to do all he can.
Yet know it is a sacrilegious will,
To slay thy father were he ne'er so ill.
'Tis lawful graybeard for to do to him,
What ought not to be done unto a father.
Hath he not wiped me from the Turkish crown?
Preferred he not the stubborn Janissaries,
And heard the Bassa's stout petitions,
Before he would give ear to my request?
As sure as day, mine eyes shall ne'er taste sleep,
Before my sword have riven his perjured breast.
Ah let me never live to see that day.
Yes thou shalt live, but never see that day,
Wanting the tapers that should give thee light:
Thou shalt not see so great felicity,
When I shall rend out Bajazet's dim eyes,
And by his death install myself a king.
Ah cruel tyrant and unmerciful,
More bloody than the Anthropophagi,
That fill their hungry stomachs with man's flesh.
Thou shouldst have slain me barbarous Acomat,
Not leave me in so comfortless a life
To live on earth, and never see the sun.
Nay let him die that liveth at his ease,
Death would a wretched caitiff greatly please.
And think'st thou then to escape unpunished,
No Acomat, though both mine eyes be gone,
Yet are my hands left on to murder thee.
Was well rememb'red: Regan, cut them off.
Now in that sort go tell thy Emperor
That if himself had but been in thy place,
I would have used him crueler than thee:
Here take thy hands: I know thou lov'st them well.
Which hand is this? right? or left? canst thou tell?
I know not which it is, but this my hand.
But o thou supreme architect of all,
First mover of those tenfold crystal orbs,
Where all those moving, and unmoving eyes
Behold thy goodness everlastingly:
See, unto thee I lift these bloody arms,
For hands I have not for to lift to thee,
And in thy justice dart thy smold'ring flame
Upon the head of cursed Acomat.
O cruel heavens and injurious fates,
Even the last refuge of a wretched man,
Is took from me: for how can Aga weep?
Or ruin a brinish show'r of pearled tears?
Wanting the wat'ry cisterns of his eyes?
Come led me back again to Bajazet,
The woefullest, and saddest Ambassador
That ever was dispatched to any King.
Why so, this music pleases Acomat.
And would I had my doting father here,
I would rip up his breast, and rend his heart,
Into his bowels thrust my angry hands,
As willingly, and with as good a mind,
As I could be the Turkish Emperor.
And by the clear declining vault of heaven,
Whither the souls of dying men do flee,
Either I mean to die the death myself,
Or make that old false traitor bleed his last.
For death no sorrow could unto me bring,
So Acomat might die the Turkish king.
Is this the body of my sovereign?
Are these the sacred pillars that support
The image of true magnanimity?
Ah Bajazet, thy son false Acomat
Is full resolved to take thy life from thee:
'Tis true, 'tis true, witness these handless arms,
Witness these empty lodges of mine eyes,
Witness the gods that from the highest heaven
Beheld the tyrant with remorseless heart,
Pulled out mine eyes, and cut off my weak hands.
Witness that sun whose golden colored beams
Your eyes do see, but mine can ne'er behold:
Witness the earth that sucked up my blood,
Streaming in rivers from my tronked arms.
Witness the present that he sends to thee,
Open my bosom, there you shall it see.
Those are the hands, which Aga once did use,
To toss the spear, and in a warlike gyre
To hurtle my sharp sword about my head,
Those sends he to the woeful Emperor,
Why is my sovereign silent all this while?
Ah Aga, Bajazet fain would speak to thee,
But sudden sorrow eateth up my words.
Bajazet Aga, fain would weep for thee,
But cruel sorrow drieth up my tears.
Bajazet Aga, fain would die for thee,
But grief hath weak'ned my poor aged hands.
How can he speak, whose tongue sorrow hath tied?
How can he mourn, that cannot shed a tear?
How shall he live, that full of misery
Calleth for death, which will not let him die?
And cowards spend the time in bootless moan.
We'll load the earth with such a mighty host
Of Janissaries, stern-born sons of Mars,
That Phoeb shall fly and hide him in the clouds
For fear our javelins thrust him from his wain.
Old Aga was a Prince among your Lords,
His Counsels always were true oracles,
And shall he thus unmanly be misused,
And he unpunished that did the deed?
Shall Mahomet and poor Zonara's ghosts,
And the good governor of Natalia
Wander in Stygian meadows unrevenged:
Good Emperor stir up thy manly heart,
And send forth all thy warlike Janissaries
To chastise that rebellious Acomat.
Thou know'st we cannot fight without a guide,
And he must be one of the royal blood,
Sprung from the loins of mighty Ottoman,
And who remains now, but young Selimus:
So please your grace to pardon his offence,
And make him captain of th' imperial host.
Ay, good Mustaffa, send for Selimus,
So I may be revenged I care not how,
The worst that can befall me is but death,
Selimus he must work me this good turn,
I cannot kill myself, he'll do 't for me.
Come Aga, thou and I will weep the while:
Thou for thy eyes and loss of both thy hands,
I for th' unkindness of my Acomat.
Will fortune favor me yet once again?
And will she thrust the cards into my hands?
Well if I chance but once to get the deck,
To deal about and shuffle as I would:
Let Selim never see the daylight spring,
Unless I shuffle out myself a king.
Friend let me see thy letter once again,
That I may read these reconciling lines.
Thou hast a pardon Selim granted thee.
Mustaffa and the forward Janissaries
That thou mayst be their captain general
Against th' attempts of Soldan Acomat.
Why that's the thing that I requested most,
That I might once th' imperial army lead:
And since it's offered me so willingly,
Beshrew me but I'll take their courtesy.
Soft let me see is there no policy
T' entrap poor Selimus in this device?
It may be that my father fears me yet,
lest I should once again rise up in arms,
And like Antaeus quelled by Hercules,
Gather new forces by my overthrow:
And therefore sends for me under pretense
Of this, and that: but when he hath me there,
He'll make me sure for putting him in fear.
Distrust is good, when there's cause of distrust
Read it again, perchance thou dost mistake.
O, here's Mustaffa's signet set thereto,
Then Selim cast all foolish fear aside,
For he's a Prince that favors thy estate,
And hateth treason worse than death itself.
And hardly can I think he could be brought
If there were treason, to subscribe his name.
Come friend, the cause requires we should be gone,
Now once again have at the Turkish throne.
Come mournful Aga, come and sit by me,
Thou hast been sorely grieved for Bajazet,
Good reason then that he should grieve for thee.
Give me thy arm, though thou hast lost thy hands,
And liv'st as a poor exile in this light,
Yet hast thou won the heart of Bajazet.
Your grace's words are very comfortable,
And well can Aga bear his grievous loss,
Since it was for so good a Prince's sake.
Father, if I may call thee by that name,
Whose life I aimed at with rebellious sword:
In all humility thy reformed son,
Offers himself into your grace's hands,
And at your feet layeth his bloody sword,
Which he advanced against your majesty.
If my offense do seem so odious
That I deserve not longer time to live,
Behold I open unto you my breast,
Ready prepared to die at your command.
But if repentance in unfeigned heart,
And sorrow for my grievous crime forepast,
May merit pardon at your princely hands.
Behold where poor inglorious Selimus,
Upon his knees begs pardon of your grace.
Stand up my son, I joy to hear thee speak,
But more, to hear thou art so well reclaimed.
Thy crime was ne'er so odious unto me,
But thy reformed life and humble thoughts,
Are thrice as pleasing to my aged spirit.
Selim we here pronounce thee by our will,
Chief general of the warlike Janissaries.
Go lead them out against false Acomat,
Which hath so grievously rebelled 'gainst me.
Spare him not Selim, though he be my son,
Yet do I now clean disinherit him,
As common enemy to me and mine.
May Selim live to show how dutiful
And loving he will be to Bajazet.
So now doth fortune smile on me again,
And in regard of former injuries,
Offer me millions of Diadems:
I smile to see how that the good old man,
Thinks Selim's thoughts are brought to such an ebb
As he hath cast off all ambitious hope.
But soon shall that opinion be removed,
For if I once get 'mongst the Janissars,
Then on my head the golden crown shall sit.
Well Bajazet, I fear me thou wilt grieve,
That ere thou didst thy feigning son believe.
Now Aga, all the thoughts that troubled me,
Do rest within the centre of my heart
And thou shalt shortly joy as much with me,
Then Acomat by Selim's consuming sword,
Shall lose that ghost, which made thee lose thy sight.
Ah Bajazet, Aga looks not for revenge,
But will pour out his prayers to the heavens,
That Acomat may learn by Selimus,
To yield himself up to his father's grace.
How now, what sudden triumph have we here?
Ah gracious Lord, the captains of the host,
With one assent have crowned Prince Selimus,
And here he comes with all the Janissaries,
To crave his confirmation at thy hands.
Bajazet, we the captains of thy host,
Knowing thy weak and too unwieldy age,
Unable is longer to govern us:
Have chosen Selimus thy younger son
That he may be our leader and our guide,
Against the Sophi and his Persians,
'Gainst the victorious Soldan Tonumbey.
Their wants but thy consent, which we will have,
Or hew thy body piecemeal with our swords.
Needs must I give, what is already gone.
Here Selimus, thy father Bajazet
Wearied with cares that wait upon a king,
Resigns the crown as willingly to thee,
As e'er my father gave it unto me.
Long live Selimus Emperor of Turks.
Live thou a long and a victorious reign,
And be triumpher of thine enemies.
Aga and I will to Dimoticum,
And live in peace the remnant of our days.
Now sit I like the arm-strong son of Jove,
When after he had all his monsters quelled,
He was received in heaven 'mongst the gods,
And had fair Hebe for his lovely bride.
As many labors Selimus hath had,
And now at length attained to the crown,
This is my Hebe, and this is my heaven.
Bajazet goeth to Dimeticum,
And there he purposes to live at ease,
But Selimus, as long as he is on earth,
Thou shalt not sleep in rest without some broil,
For Bajazet is unconstant as the wind:
To make that sure I have a platform laid.
Bajazet hath with him a cunning Jew,
Professing physic, and so skilled therein,
As if he had pow'r over life and death.
Withal, a man so stout and resolute,
That he will venture anything for gold.
This Jew with some intoxicated drink,
Shall poison Bajazet and that blind Lord,
Then one of Hydra's heads is clean cut off.
Go some and fetch Abraham the Jew.
Corcut, thy pageant next is to be played.
For though he be a grave Philosopher,
Given to read Mahomet's dread laws,
And Razin's toys, and Avicenna's drugged,
Yet he may have a longing for the crown.
Besides, he may by devilish Necromancy
Procure my death, or work my overthrow,
The devil still is ready to do harm.
Hali, you and your brother presently
Shall with an army to Magnesia,
There you shall find the scholar at his book,
Corcut once dead, then Acomat remains,
Whose death will make me certain of the crown.
These heads of Hydra are the principal,
When these are off, some other will arise,
My sister Solyma, Mustaffa's wife,
All these shall suffer shipwreck on a shelf,
Rather then Selim will be drowned himself.
Jew thou art welcome unto Selimus,
I have a piece of service for you sir,
But on your life be secret in the deed.
Get a strong poison, whose envenomed taste
May take away the life of Bajazet,
Before he pass forth of Byzantium.
I warrant you my gracious sovereign,
He shall be quickly sent unto his grave,
For I have potions of so strong a force,
That whosoever touches then shall die.
And would your grace would once but taste of them
I could as willingly afford them you,
As your aged father Bajazet.
My Lord, I am resolved to do the deed.
So this is well: for I am none of those
That make a conscience for to kill a man.
For nothing is more hurtful to a Prince,
Than to be scrupulous and religious.
I like Lysander's counsel passing well,
If that I cannot speed with lion's force,
To clothe my complots in a fox's skin.
For th' only things that wrought our Empery,
Were open wrongs, and hidden treachery.
O, th' are two wings wherewith I use to fly,
If any seek our wrongs to remedy,
With these I take his meditation short,
And one of these shall still maintain my cause,
Or fox's skin, or lion's rending paws.
Come Aga let us sit and mourn a while,
For fortune never showed herself so cross,
To any Prince as to poor Bajazet.
That woeful Emperor first of my name,
Whom the Tartarians locked in cage,
To be a spectacle to all the world,
For Tamberlain the scourge of nations,
Was he that pulled him from his kingdom so.
But mine own sons, expel me from the throne,
Ah where shall I begin to make my moan.
Or what shall I first reckon in my plaint,
From my youth up I have been drowned in woe,
And to my latest hour I shall be so.
You swelling seas of never ceasing care,
Whose waves my weather-beaten ship do toss,
Your boisterous billows too unruly are
And threaten still my ruin and my loss:
Like hugy mountains do your waters rear,
Their lofty tops, and my weak vessel cross.
Alas at length allay your stormy strife,
And cruel wrath within me rages rife.
Or else my feeble bark cannot endure,
Your flashing buffets and outrageous blows,
But while thy foamy flood doth it immure,
Shall soon be wracked upon the sandy shallows.
Grief my lewd boatswain stireth nothing sure,
But without stars 'gainst tide and wind he rows,
And cares not though upon some rock we split,
A restless pilot for the charge unfit.
But out alas, the god that vales the sea,
And can alone this raging tempest stent,
Will never blow a gentle gale of ease,
But suffer my poor vessel to be rent.
Then o thou blind procurer of mischance,
That stayest thyself upon a turning wheel,
Thy cruel hand even when thou wilt enhance,
And pierce my poor heart with thy chrillant steel
Cease Bajazet, now it is Aga's turn,
Rest thou a while and gather up more tears,
The while poor Aga tell his Tragedy.
When first my mother brought me to the world,
Some blazing Comet ruled in the sky,
Portending miserable chance to me.
My parents were but men of poor estate,
And happy yet had wretched Aga be,
If Bajazet had not exalted him.
Poor Aga, had it not been much more fair,
T' have died among the cruel Persians,
Than thus at home by barbarous tyranny
To live and never see the cheerful day,
And to want hands wherewith to feel the way.
Leave weeping Aga, we have wept enough,
Now Bajazet will ban another while,
And utter curses to the concave sky,
Which may infect the regions of the air,
And bring a general plague on all the world.
Night thou most ancient grandmother of all,
First made by Jove, for rest and quiet sleep,
When cheerful day is gone from th' earth's wide hall.
Henceforth thy mantle in black Lethe sleep,
And clothe the world in darkness infernal.
Suffer not once the joyful daylight peep,
But let thy pitchy steeds aye draw thy wain,
And coal-black silence in the world still reign.
Curse on my parents that first brought me up,
And on the cradle wherein I was rocked,
Curse on the day when first I was created.
The chief commander of all Asia
Curse on my sons that drive me to this grief,
Curse on myself that can find no relief.
And curse on him, and everlasting curse,
That quenched those lamps of everburning light,
And took away my Aga's warlike hands
And curse on all things under the wide sky,
Ah Aga, I have cursed my stomach dry.
I have a drink my Lords of noble worth,
Which soon will calm your stormy passions,
And glad your hearts if so you please to taste it.
For who art thou that thus dost pity us?
Your highness' humble servant Abraham.
Abraham sit down and drink to Bajazet.
Faith I am old as well as Bajazet,
And have not many months to live on earth,
I care not much to end my life with him.
Here's to you Lordings with a full carouse.
Here Aga, woeful Bajazet drinks to thee.
Abraham, hold the cup to him while he drinks.
Now know old Lords, that you have drunk your last:
This was a potion which I did prepare
To poison you, by Selimus' instigation,
And now it is dispersed through my bones,
And glad I am that such companions
Shall go with me down to Proserpina.
Ah wicked Jew, ah cursed Selimus,
How have the destins dealt with Bajazet,
That none should cause my death but mine own son?
Had Ismael and his warlike Persians
Pierced my body with their iron spears,
Or had the strong unconquered Tonumbey
With his Egyptians took me prisoner,
And sent me with his valiant Mammalukes,
To be prey unto the Crocodiles.
It never would have grieved me half so much
But welcome death into whose calmy port,
My sorrow-beaten soul joys to arrive.
And now farewell my disobedient sons,
Unnatural sons unworthy of that name.
Farewell sweet life, and Aga now farewell,
Till we shall meet in the Elysian fields.
What greater grief had mournful Priamus,
Than that he lived to see his Hector die,
His city burned down by revenging flames,
And poor Polites slain before his face?
Aga, thy grief is matchable to his,
For I have lived to see my sovereign's death,
Yet glad that I must breathe my last with him.
And now farewell sweet light, which my poor eyes
Aga will follow noble Bajazet,
And beg a boon of lovely Proserpine,
That he and I may in the mournful fields,
Still weep and wail our strange calamities.
To bear the blows that my poor head doth feel.
And I poor fool, must ever bear the smart.
Oh hateful hellish snake of Tartary,
That feed'st on the soul of noblest men,
Damned ambition, cause of all misery,
Why dost thou creep from out thy loathsome fen,
And with thy poison animatest friends,
And gape and long one for the other's ends.
Selimus, couldst thou not content thy mind,
With the possession of the sacred throne,
Which thou didst get by father's death unkind:
Whose poisoned ghost before high God doth groan.
But thou must seek poor Corcut's overthrow,
Old Holy's sons with two great company
Of barded horse, were sent from Selimus,
To take me prisoner in Magnesia,
And death I am sure should have befell to me,
If they had once but set their eyes on me.
So thus disguised my poor Page and I,
Fled fast to Smyrna, where in a dark cave
We meant t' await th' arrival of some ship
That might transfreight us safely unto Rhodes.
But see how fortune crossed my enterprise.
Bostangi Bassa, Selim's son-in-law,
Kept all the sea coasts with his Brigandines,
That if we had but ventured on the sea,
I presently had been his prisoner.
These two days have we kept us in the cave,
Eating such herbs as the ground did afford:
And now through hunger are we both constrained
Like fearful snakes to creep out step by step,
And see if we may get us any food.
And in good time, see yonder sits a man,
Spreading a hungry dinner on the grass.
Then Bullithrumble, by that blessed Christ,
By sovereign hope which thou conceiv'st in him,
Whom dead, as everliving thou adorest.
By all the joys thou hopest to have in heaven,
Give some meat to poor hunger-starved men.
Now is the time when I may be enriched.
The brothers that were sent by Selimus
To take my Lord, Prince Corcut prisoner,
Finding him fled, proposed large rewards
To them that could declare where he remains.
Faith I'll to them and get the Portuguese,
Though by the bargain Corcut lose his head.
Why thus must Selim blind his subject eyes,
And strain his own to weep for Bajazet.
When thus they see me with religious pomp,
To celebrate his tomb-black mortary.
And though my heart cast in an iron mould,
Cannot admit the smallest dram of grief,
Yet that I may be thought to love him well,
I'll mourn in show, though I rejoice indeed.
Thus after he hath five long ages lived,
The sacred Phoenix of Arabia,
Loadeth his wings with precious perfumes.
And on the altar of the golden sun,
Offers himself a grateful sacrifice.
Long didst thou live triumphant Bajazet,
A fear unto thy greatest enemies,
And now that death the conqueror of Kings,
Dislodged hath thy never dying soul,
To flee unto the heavens from whence she came,
And leave her frail, earth pavilion,
Thy body in this ancient monument,
Where our great predecessors sleep in rest:
Thy woeful son Selimus thus doth place.
Thou wert the Phoenix of this age of ours,
And diedst wrapped in the sweet perfumes,
Of thy magnific deeds, whose lasting praise
Mounteth to highest heaven with golden wings.
Princes come bear your Emperor company
In, till the days of mourning be o'erpassed,
And then we mean to rouse false Acomat,
And cast him forth of Macedonia.
Page, if thou show us where thy master is,
Be sure thou shalt be honored for the deed,
And high exalted above other men.
That same is he, that in disguised robes,
Accompanies yon shepherd to the fields.
The sweet content that country life affords,
Passeth the royal pleasures of a King:
For there our joys are interlaced with fears:
But here no fear nor care is harbored,
But a sweet calm of a most quiet state.
Ah Corcut, would thy brother Selimus
But let thee live, here shouldst thou spend thy life,
Feeding thy sheep among these grassy lands.
But sure I wonder where my Page is gone.
Hali, the governor of Magnesia.
Poor prince, thou thoughtst in these disguised weeds,
To mask unseen: and haply thou mightst,
But that thy Page betrayed thee to us.
And be not wrath with us unhappy prince,
If we do what our sovereign commands.
'Tis for thy death that Selim sends for thee.
By hiding my estate in shepherd's coat,
T' escape the angry wrath of Selimus.
But as his wife false Eriphyle did
Betray his safety for a chain of gold,
So my false Page hath vilely dealt with me,
Pray God that thou mayst prosper so as she.
Hali, I know thou sorrowest for my case,
But it is bootless, come and let us go,
Corcut is ready, since it is must be so.
Sinam, we hear our brother Acomat
Is fled away from Macedonia,
To ask for aid of Persian Ismael,
And the Egyptian Soldan, our chief foes.
Herein my Lord I like his enterprise,
For if they give him aid as sure they will,
Being your highness' vowed enemies,
You shall have just cause for to war on them,
For giving succor 'gainst you, to your foe.
You know they are two mighty Potentates,
And may be hurtful neighbors to your grace,
And to enrich the Turkish Diadem.
With two so worthy kingdoms as they are,
Would be eternal glory to your name.
By heavens, Sinam, th' art a warrior,
And worthy counsellor unto a King.
My gracious Lord, we here present to you
Your brother Corcut, whom in Smyrna coasts
Feeding a flock of sheep upon a down,
His traitorous Page betrayed to our hands.
Thanks ye bold brothers, but for that false part,
Let the vile Page be famished to death.
Selim, in this I see thou art a Prince,
To punish treason with condign reward.
Oh sir, I love the fruit that treason brings,
But those that are the traitors, them I hate.
But Corcut, could not your Philosophy
Keep you safe from my Janissaries' hands.
We thought you had old Gyges' wondrous ring,
That so you were invisible to us.
Selim, thou deal'st unkindly with thy brother,
To seek my death, and make a jest of me.
Upbraid'st thou me with my philosophy?
Why this I learned by studying learned arts,
That I can bear my fortune as it falls,
And that I fear no whit thy cruelty,
Since thou wilt deal no otherwise with me,
Then thou hast dealt with aged Bajazet.
By heavens Corcut, thou shalt surely die,
For sland'ring Selim with my father's death.
Then let me freely speak my mind this once,
For thou shalt never hear me speak again.
Nay we can give such losers' leave to speak.
Then Selim, hear thy brother's dying words,
And mark them well, for ere thou die thyself,
Thou shalt perceive all things will come to pass,
That Corcut doth divine before his death.
Since my vain flight from fair Magnesia,
Selim I have conversed with Christians,
And learned of them the way to save my soul,
And please the anger of the highest God.
'Tis he that made this pure Christalline vault
Which hangeth over our unhappy heads,
From thence he doth behold each sinner's fault:
And though our sins under our feet he treads,
And for a while seem for to wink at us,
But if we do like headstrong sons neglect
To hearken to our loving father's voice,
Then in his anger will he us reject,
And give us over to our wicked choice.
Selim before his dreadful majesty,
There lies a book written with bloody lines,
Where our offences all are registered.
Which if we do not hastily repent,
We are reserved to lasting punishment.
Thou wretched Selimus hast greatest need
To ponder these things in thy secret thoughts,
If thou consider what strange massacres
And cruel murders thou hast caused be done.
Think on the death of woeful Bajazet.
Doth not his ghost still haunt thee for revenge?
Selim in Chiurlu didst thou set upon
Our aged father in his sudden flight:
In Chiurlu shalt thou die a grievous death.
And if thou wilt not change thy greedy mind,
Thy soul shall be tormented in dark hell,
Where woe, and woe, and never ceasing woe,
Shall found about thy ever-damned soul.
Now Selim I have spoken, let me die:
I never will entreat thee for my life.
Selim farewell: thou God of Christians,
Receive my dying soul into thy hands.
What, is he dead? then Selimus is safe,
And hath no more corrivals in the crown.
For as for Acomat he soon shall see,
His Persian aid cannot save him from me.
Now Sinam march to fair Amasia walls,
Where Acomat's stout Queen immures herself,
And girt the city with a warlike siege,
For since her husband is my enemy,
I see no cause why she should be my friend.
They say young Amurath and Aladdin,
Her bastard brood, are come to succor her.
But I'll prevent this their officiousness,
And send their soul down to their grandfather.
Mustaffa you shall keep Byzantium,
While I and Sinam girt Amasia.
It grieves my soul that Bajazet's fair line,
Should be eclipsed thus by Selimus,
Whose cruel soul will never be at rest
Till none remain of Ottoman's fair race
But he himself: yet for old Bajazet
Loved Mustaffa dear unto his death,
I will show mercy to his family.
Go sirrah, post to Acomat's young sons,
And bid them as they mean to save their lives,
To fly in haste from fair Amasia,
lest cruel Selim put them to the sword.
And now Mustaffa, prepare thou thy neck,
For thou art next to die by Selim's hands.
Stern Sinam Bassa grudgeth still at thee,
And crabbed Hali stormeth at thy life,
All repine that thou art honored so,
To be the brother of their Emperor.
But wherefore comes my lovely Solyma?
Mustaffa I am come to seek thee out,
If ever thy distressed Solyma,
Found grace and favor in thy manly heart:
Fly hence with me unto some desert land,
For if we tarry here we are but dead.
This night when fair Lucina's shining wain,
Was past the chair of bright Cassiopey,
A fearful vision appeared to me.
Me thought Mustaffa, I beheld thy neck
So often folded in my loving arms,
In foul disgrace of Bassa's fair degree,
With a vile halter basely compassed.
And while I poured my tears on thy dead corpse,
A greedy lion with wide gaping throat,
Seized on my trembling body with his feet,
And in a moment rend me all to nought.
Fly, sweet Mustaffa, or we be but dead.
Why should we fly beauteous Solyma,
Moved by a vain and a fantastic dream?
Or if we did fly whither should we fly?
If to the farthest part of Asia,
Know'st thou not Solyma, kings have long hands?
Come, come, my joy, return again with me,
And banish hence these melancholy thoughts.
Messenger is it true that Selimus
Is not far hence encamped with his host?
And means he to disjoin the hapless sons
From helping our distressed mother's town?
'Tis true my Lord, and if you love your lives
Fly from the bounds of his dominions,
For he you know is most unmerciful.
Here messenger take this for thy reward.
But we sweet Aladdin, let us depart,
Now in the quiet silence of the night
That ere the windows of the morn be ope,
We may be far enough from Selimus.
I'll to Egyptus. I to Persia.
But is it certain Hali they are gone?
And that Mustaffa moved them to fly?
Certain my Lord, I met the messenger
As he returned from young Alinda:
And learned of them, Mustaffa, was the man
That certified the Princes of your will.
It is enough: Mustaffa shall aby
At a dear price his pitiful intent.
Hali go fetch Mustaffa and his wife.
For though she be sister to Selimus,
Yet loves she him better then Selimus.
So that if he do die at our command,
And she should live: soon would she work a mean
To work revenge for her Mustaffa's death.
False of thy faith, and traitor to thy king,
Did we so highly always honor thee,
And dost thou thus requite our love with treason,
For why shouldst thou send to young Alinda,
And Amurath, the sons of Acomat,
To give them notice of our secrecies,
Knowing they were my vowed enemies?
I do not seek to lesson my offence
Great Selimus, but truly do protest
I did it not for hatred of your grace,
So help me God and holy Mahomet.
But for I grieved to see the famous stock
Of worthy Bajazet fall to decay,
Therefore I sent the Princes both away.
Your highness knows Mustaffa was the man
That saved you in the battle of Churliu,
When I and all the warlike Janissaries
Had hedged your person in a dangerous ring.
Yet I took pity on your danger there,
And made a way for you to 'scape by flight.
But those your Bassa's have incensed you,
Repining at Mustaffa's dignity.
Stern Sinam grinds his angry teeth at me.
Old Holi's sons do bend their brows at me,
And are aggrieved that Mustaffa hath
Showed himself a better man than they.
They know Mustaffa never proved false.
Ay, I have been as true to Selimus,
As ever subject to his sovereign,
So help me God and holy Mahomet.
You did it not because you hated us,
But for you loved the sons of Acomat.
Sinam, I charge thee quickly strangle him,
He loves not me that loves mine enemies.
As for your holy protestation,
It cannot enter into Selim's ears:
For why Mustaffa? every merchant man
Will praise his own ware be it ne'er so bad.
For Solima's sake mighty Selimus,
Spare my Mustaffa's life, and let me die:
Or if thou wilt not be so gracious,
Yet let me die before I see his death.
Nay Solima, yourself shall also die,
Because you may be in the selfsame fault.
Why stay'st thou Sinam? strangle him I say.
Ah Selimus, he made thee Emperor,
And wilt thou thus requite his benefits?
Thou art a cruel tiger and no man,
That couldst endure to see before thy face,
So brave a man as my Mustaffa was,
Cruelly strangled for so small a fault.
Thou shalt not after live him Solima.
'Twere pity thou shouldst want the company
Of thy dear husband: Sinam, strangle her.
And now to fair Amasia let us march.
Acomat's wife, and her unmanly host,
Will not be able to endure our sight,
Much less make strong resistance in hard fight.
Welcome my Lords into my native soil,
The crown whereof by right is due to me:
Though Selim by the Janissaries' choice,
Through usurpation keep the same from me.
You know contrary to my father's mind,
He was enthronized by the Bassa's will,
And after his installing, wickedly
By poison made good Bajazet to die.
And strangled Corcut, and exiled me.
These injuries we come for to revenge,
And raise his siege from fair Amasia walls.
Prince of Amasia, and the rightful heir
Unto the mighty Turkish Diadem:
With willing heart great Tonombey hath left
Egyptian Nilus and my father's court,
To aid thee in thy undertaken war,
And by the great Usancassano's ghost,
Companion unto mighty Tamberlain,
From whom my father lineally descends,
Fortune shall show herself too cross to me,
But we will thrust Selimus from his throne,
And revest Acomat in the Empire.
Thanks to the uncontrolled Tonombey.
But let us haste us to Amasia,
To succor my besieged citizens.
None but my Queen is overseer there,
And too too weak is all her policy,
Against so great a foe as Selimus.
Summon a parley sirs that we may know
Whither these Mushrooms here will yield or no.
What cravest thou bloodthirsty parricide?
Is't not enough that thou hast foully slain,
Thy loving father noble Bajazet,
And strangled Corcut thine unhappy brother
Slain brave Mustaffa, and fair Solima?
Because they favored my unhappy sons,
But thou must yet seek for more massacres:
Go, wash thy guilty hands in lukewarm blood.
Yet do the heavens still bear an equal eye,
And vengeance follows thee even at the heels.
Queen of Amasia, wilt thou yield thyself?
First shall the overflowing Euripus
Of swift Euboea stop his restless course
And Phoebus' bright globe bring the day from the west,
And quench his hot flames in the Eastern sea.
Thy bloody sword ungracious Selimus
Sheathed in the bowels of thy dearest friends:
Thy wicked guard which still attends on thee,
Fleshing themselves in murder, lust, and rape:
What hope of favor? what security?
Rather what death do they not promise me?
Then think not Selimus that we will yield,
But look for strong resistance at our hands.
Why then you never-daunted Janissaries,
Advance your shields and uncontrolled spears,
Your conquering hands in foemen's blood embay,
For Selimus himself will lead the way.
Now sturdy dame, where are your men of war
To guard your person from my angry sword?
What? though braved us on your city walls,
Like to that Amanonian Menalip,
Leaving the banks of swift-streamed Thermodon
To challenge combat with great Hercules:
Yet Selimus hath plucked your haughty plumes,
Nor can your spouse rebellious Acomat,
Nor Alinda, or Amurath your sons,
Deliver you from our victorious hands.
Selim I scorn thy threat'nings as thyself.
And though ill hap hath given me to thy hands,
Yet will I never beg my life of thee.
Fortune may chance to frown as much on thee.
And Acomat whom thou dost scorn so much,
May take thy base Tartarian concubine,
As well as thou hast took his loyal Queen.
Thou hast not fortune tied in a chain,
Nor dost thou like a wary pilot sit,
And wisely stir this all containing barge.
Thou art a man as those whom thou hast slain,
And some of them were better far than thou.
Strangle her Hali, let her scold no more.
Now let us march to meet with Acomat,
He brings with him that Egyptian great bug,
Strong Tonombey, Usan-Cassano's son.
But we shall soon with our fine-tempered swords,
Engrave our prowess on their burgonets,
Were they as mighty and as fell of force,
Heap hill on hill to scale the starry sky,
When Briareus armed with a hundred hands,
Flung forth a hundreth mountains at great Jove,
And when the monstrous giant Monichus
Hurled mount Olympus at great Mars his targe,
And darted cedars at Minerva's shield.
What are the urchins crept out of their dens,
Under the conduct of this porcupine?
Dost thou not tremble Acomat at us,
To see how courage masketh in our looks,
And white-winged victory sits on our swords?
Captain of Egypt, thou that vaunt'st thyself
Sprung from great Tamberlain the Scythia thief,
Who bade the enterprise this bold attempt,
To set thy feet within the Turkish confines,
Or lift thy hands against our majesty?
Brother of Trebizond, your squared words,
And broad-mouthed terms, can never conquer us.
We come resolved to pull the Turkish crown,
Which thou dost wrongfully detain from me,
By conquering sword from off thy coward crest.
Acomat, sith the quarrel toucheth none
But thee and me: I dare, and challenge thee.
Should he accept the combat of a boy?
Whose unripe years and far unriper wit
Like to the bold foolhardy Phaeton
That sought to rule the chariot of the sun,
Hath moved thee t' undertake an Empery.
Thou that resolv'st in peremptory terms,
To call him boy that scorns to cope with thee:
But thou canst better use thy bragging blade,
Than thou canst rule thy overflowing tongue,
Soon shalt thou know that Selim's mighty arm
Is able to overthrow poor Tonombey.
The field is lost, and Acomat is taken.
Ah Tonombey, how canst thou show thy face
To thy victorious sire, thus conquered.
A matchless knight is warlike Selimus.
And like a shepherd 'mongst a swarm of gnats,
Dings down the flying Persians with their swords.
Twice I encount'red with him hand to hand,
And twice returned foiled and ashamed.
For never yet since I could manage Arms,
Could any match with mighty Tonombey,
But this heroic Emperor Selimus.
Why stand I still, and rather do not fly
The great occision which the victors make?
Thus when the coward Greeks fled to their ships,
The noble Hector all besmeared in blood,
Returned in triumph to the walls of Troy.
A gallant trophy, Bassa's have we won,
Beating the never-foiled Tonombey,
And hewing passage through the Persians.
As when a lion raving for his prey,
Falleth upon a drove of horned bulls,
And rends them strongly in his kingly paws.
Or Mars armed in his adamantine coat,
Mounted upon his fiery-shining wain,
Scatters the troops of warlike Thracians,
And warms cold Hebras with hot streams of blood.
Brave Sinam, for thy noble prisoner,
Thou shalt be general of my Janissaries.
And Belierbey of fair Natalia.
Now Acomat, thou monster of the world,
Why stoopest thou not with reverence to thy king?
Selim if thou have gotten victory,
Then use it to thy contentation.
If I had conquered, know assuredly
I would have said as much and more to thee.
Know I disdain them as I do thyself,
And scorn to stoop or bend my Lordly knee,
To such a tyrant as is Selimus.
Thou slew'st my Queen without regard or care,
Of love or duty, or thine own good name.
Then Selim take that which thy hap doth give,
Disgraced, display'st, I longer loath to live.
Then Sinam strangle him: now he is dead,
Who doth remain to trouble Selimus?
Now am I King alone and none but I.
For since my father's death until this time,
I never wanted some competitors.
Now as the weary wand'ring traveller
That hath his steps guided through many lands,
Through boiling soil of Africa and Ind,
When he returns unto his native home:
Sits down among his friends, and with delight
Declares the travels he hath overpassed.
So mayst thou Selimus, for thou hast trod
The monster-garden paths, that led to crowns.
Would, would, I smile to think how Selimus
Like the Egyptian Ibis hath expelled
Those swarming armies of swift-winged snakes,
That sought to overrun my territories,
When sweltering heat the earth's green children spoils
From forth the fens of venomous Africa,
The generation of those flying snakes,
Do band themselves in troops, and take their way
To Nilus' bounds: but those industrious birds,
Those Ibides meet them in set array,
And eat them up like to a swarm of gnats,
Preventing such a mischief from the land.
But see how unkind nature deals with them:
From out their eggs rises the basilisk,
Whose only sight kills millions of men.
When Acomat lifted his ungracious hands
Against my aged father Bajazet.
They sent for me, and I like Egypt's bird
Have rid that monster, and his fellow mates.
But as from Ibis springs the Basilisk,
Whose only touch burneth up stones and trees.
So Selimus hath proved a Cockatrice,
And clean consumed all the family
Of noble Ottoman, except himself.
And now to you my neighbor Emperors,
That durst lend aid to Selim's enemies,
Sinam those Soldans of the Orient,
Egypt and Persia, Selimus will quell,
Or he himself will sink to lowest hell.
This winter will we rest and breathe ourselves:
But soon as Zephyrus' sweet-smelling blast
Shall greatly creep over the flow'ry meads,
We'll have a fling at the Egyptian crown,
And join it unto ours, or lose our own.
Thus have we brought victorious Selimus,
Unto the Crown of great Arabia:
Next shall you see him with triumphant sword,
Dividing kingdoms into equal shares,
And give them to their warlike followers.
If this first part Gentles, do like you well,
The second part, shall greater murders tell.
<ORLAVS.txt>
Victorious princes, summoned to appear
Within the continent of Africa;
From seven-fold Nilus to Taprobany,
Where fair Apollo darting forth his light
From Gades' islands, where stout Hercules
Emblazed his trophies on two posts of brass,
To Tanais, whose swift-declining floods
Environ rich Europa to the north;
From out your courts by beauty to this coast,
To seek and sue for fair Angelica;
Sith none but one must have this happy prize,
At which you all have levelled long your thoughts,
Set each man forth his passions how he can,
And let her censure make the happiest 
The fairest flower that glories Africa,
Whose beauty Phaìbus dares not dash with showers,
Over whose climate never hung a cloud,
But smiling Titan lights the horizon,‚Äî
Egypt is mine, and there I hold my state,
Seated in Cairo and in Babylon.
From thence the matchless beauty of Angelica,
Whose hue['s] as bright as are those silver doves
That wanton Venus mann'th upon her fist,
Forced me to cross and cut th' Atlantic seas,
To oversearch the fearful ocean,
Where I arrived t' eternize with my lance
The matchless beauty of fair Angelica;
Nor tilt, nor tourney, but my spear and shield
Resounding on their crests and sturdy helms,
Topped high with plumes, like Mars his burgonet,
Enchasing on their curats with my blade,
That none so fair as fair Angelica.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love, my lord; let that suffice for 
Cuba my seat, a region so enriched
With favors sparkling from the smiling heavens,
As those that seek for traffic to my coast
Account it like that wealthy Paradise
From whence floweth Gihon and swift Euphrates:
The earth within her bowels hath enwrapt,
As in the massy storehouse of the world,
Millions of gold, as bright as was the shower
That wanton Jove sent down to Dan√§e.
Marching from thence to manage arms abroad,
I passed the triple-parted regiment
That froward Saturn gave unto his sons,
Erecting statues of my chivalry,
Such and so brave as never Hercules
Vowed for the love of lovely Iole.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love, my lord; let that suffice for 
And I, my lord, am Mandricard of Mexico,
Whose climate['s] fairer than Iberia's,
Seated beyond the sea of Tripoli,
And richer than the plot Hesperides,
Or that same isle wherein Ulysses' love
Lulled in her lap the young Telegonus;
That did but Venus tread a dainty step,
So would she like the land of Mexico,
As, Paphos and brave Cyprus set aside,
With me sweet lovely Venus would abide.
From thence, mounted upon a Spanish bark,
Such as transported Jason to the fleece,
Come from the south, I furrowed Neptune's seas,
Northeast as far as is the frozen Rhene;
Leaving fair Voya, crossed up Danuby,
As high as Saba, whose enhancing streams
Cut 'twixt the Tartars and the Russians:
There did I act as many brave attempts,
As did Pirithous for his Proserpine.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love, my lord; let that suffice for 
The bordering islands, seated herein ken,
Whose shores are sprinkled with rich orient pearl,
More bright of hue than were the margarites
That Caesar found in wealthy Albion;
The sands of Tagus all of burnished gold
Made Thetis never prouder on the clifts
That overpeer the bright and golden shore,
Than do the rubbish of my country seas:
And what I dare, let say the Portingale,
And Spaniard tell, who, manned with mighty fleets,
Came to subdue my islands to their king,
Filling our seas with stately argosies,
Calvars and magars, hulks of burden great;
Which Brandimart rebated from his coast,
And sent them home ballassed with little wealth.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love, my lord; let that suffice for 
Lords of the south, and princes of esteem,
Viceroys unto the state of Africa,
I am no king, yet am I princely born,
Descended from the royal house of France,
And nephew to the mighty Charlemagne,
Surnamed Orlando, the County Palatine.
Swift fame hath sounded to our western seas
The matchless beauty of Angelica,
Fairer than was the nymph of Mercury,
Who, when bright Phoebus mounteth up his coach,
And tracts Aurora in her silver steps,
And sprinkles from the folding of her lap
White lilies, roses, and sweet violets.
Yet thus believe me, princes of the south,
Although my country's love, dearer than pearl
Or mines of gold, might well have kept me back;
The sweet conversing with my king and friends,
Left all for love, might well have kept me back
The seas by Neptune hoised to the 'heavens,
Whose dangerous flaws might well have kept me back;
The savage Moors and Anthropophagi,
Whose lands I passed, might well have kept me back;
The doubt of entertainment in the court
When I arrived, might well have kept me back;
But so the fame of fair Angelica
Stamped in my thoughts the figure of her love,
As neither country, king, or seas, or cannibals,
Could by despairing keep Orlando back.
I list not boast in acts of chivalry,
(An humor never fitting with my mind,)
But come there forth the proudest champion
That hath suspicion in the Palatine,
And with thy trusty sword Durandell,
Single, I'll register upon his helm
What I dare do for fair Angelica.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
Angelica herself shall speak for 
Daughter, thou hear'st what love hath here alleged,
How all these kings, by beauty summoned here,
Put in their pleas, for hope of diadem,
Of noble deeds, of wealth, and chivalry,
All hoping to possess Angelica.
Sith father's will may hap to aim amiss,
(For parents' thoughts in love oft step awry,)
Choose thou the man who best contenteth thee,
And he shall wear the Afric crown next 
For trust me, daughter, like of whom thou please,
Thou satisfied, my thoughts shall be at ease.
Kings of the south, viceroys of Africa,
Sith father's will hangs on his daughter's choice,
And I, as erst Princess Andromache
Seated amidst the crew of Priam's sons,
Have liberty to choose where best I love;
Must freely say, for fancy hath no fraud,
That far unworthy is Angelica
Of such as deign to grace her with their loves;
The Soldan with his seat in Babylon,
The Prince of Cuba, and of Mexico.
Whose wealthy crowns might win a woman's will,
Young Brandimart, master of all the isles
Where Neptune planted hath his treasury;
The worst of these men of so high import
As may command a greater dame than I.
But fortune, or some deep-inspiring fate,
Venus, or else the bastard brat of Mars,
Whose bow commands the motions of the mind,
Hath sent proud love to enter such a plea
As nonsuits all your princely evidence,
And flat commands that, maugre majesty,
I choose Orlando, County Palatine.
How likes Marsilius of his daughter's choice?
As fits Marsilius of his daughter's spouse.
Highly thou wrong'st us, King of Africa,
To brave thy neighbor princes with disgrace,
To tie thine honor to thy daughter's thoughts,
Whose choice is like that Greekish giglot's love,
That left her lord, Prince Menelaus,
And with a swain made scape away to Troy.
What is Orlando but a straggling mate,
Banished for some offence by Charlemagne,
Skipped from his country as Anchises' son,
And means, as he did to the Carthage Queen,
To pay her ruth and ruin for her love?
Injurious Cuba, ill it fits thy 'gree
To wrong a stranger with discourtesy.
Were't not the sacred presence of Angelica
Prevails with me, as Venus' smiles with Mars,
To set a supersedeas of my wrath,
Soon should I teach thee what it were to brave.
And, Frenchman, were't not 'gainst the law of arms,
In place of parley for to draw a sword,
Untaught companion, I would learn you know
What duty 'longs to such a prince as he.
Then as did Hector 'fore Achilles' tent,
Trotting his courser softly on the plains,
Proudly dared forth the stoutest youth of Greece;
So who stands highest in his own conceit,
And thinks his courage can perform the most,
Let him but throw his gauntlet on the ground,
And I will pawn my honor to his gage,
He shall ere night be met and combated.
Shame you not, princes, at this bad agree,
To wrong a stranger with discourtesy?
Believe me, lords, my daughter hath made choice,
And, maugre him that thinks him most aggrieved,
She shall enjoy the County Palatine.
But would these princes follow my advice,
And enter arms as did the Greeks 'gainst Troy,
Nor he, nor thou shouldst have Angelica.
Let him be thought a dastard to his death,
That will not sell the travails he hath past
Dearer than for a woman's fooleries:
I vow to hie me home to Mexico,
To troop myself with such a crew of men
As shall so fill the downs of Africa,
Like to the plains of watery Thessaly,
Whenas an eastern gale whistling aloft
Hath overspread the ground with grasshoppers.
Then see, Marsilius, if the Palatine
Can keep his love from falling to our lots,
Or thou canst keep thy country free from spoil.
Why, think you, lords, with haughty menaces
To dare me out within my palace-gates?
Or hope you to make conquest by constraint
Of that which never could be got by love?
Pass from my court, make haste out of my land,
Stay not within the bounds Marsilius holds;
Lest, little brooking these unfitting braves,
My choler overslip the law of arms,
And I inflict revenge on such abuse.
I'll beard and brave thee in thy proper town,
And here ensconce myself despite of thee,
And hold thee play till Mandricard return.
What says the mighty Soldan of Egypt?
That when Prince Menelaus with all his mates
Had ten years held their siege in Asia,
Folding their wraths in cinders of fair Troy,
Yet, for their arms grew by conceit of love,
Their trophies were but conquest of a girl:
Then trust me, lords, I'll never manage arms
For women's loves that are so quickly lost.
See what we dare, and thereon set your rest.
[Exeunt all except SACRIPANT and his 
 Boast not too much, Marsilius, in thyself,
Nor of contentment in Angelica;
For Sacripant must have Angelica,
And with her Sacripant must have the crown:
By hook or crook I must and will have both.
Ah sweet Revenge, incense their angry minds,
Till, all these princes weltering in their bloods,
The crown do fall to County Sacripant!
Sweet are the thoughts that smother from conceit:
For when I come and set me down to rest,
My chair presents a throne of majesty;
And when I set my bonnet on my head,
Methinks I fit my forehead for a crown;
And when I take my truncheon in my fist,
A sceptre then comes tumbling in my thoughts;
My dreams are princely, all of diadems.
Honor, methinks the title is too base:
Mighty, glorious, and excellent, ay, these,
My glorious genius, sound within my mouth;
These please the ear, and with a sweet applause
Make me in terms coequal with the gods.
Then these, Sacripant, and none but these;
And these, or else make hazard of thy life.
Let it suffice, I will conceal the rest.
 My lord! How basely was this slave brought up,
That knows no titles fit for dignity,
To grace his master with hyperboles!
why, the basest baron of fair Africa
Deserves as much: yet County Sacripant
Must he a swain salute with name of lord.
They deem, my lord, your honor lives at peace,
As one that's neuter in these mutinies,
And covets to rest equal friend to both;
Neither envious to Prince Mandricard,
Nor wishing ill unto Marsilius,
That you may safely pass where'er you please,
With friendly salutations from them both.
Ay, so they guess, but level far awry;
For if they knew the secrets of my thoughts,
Mine emblem sorteth to another sense.
I wear not these as one resolved to peace,
But blue and red as enemy to both;
Blue, as hating King Marsilius,
And red, as in revenge to Mandricard;
Foe unto both, friend only to myself,
And to the crown, for that's the golden mark
Which makes my thoughts dream on a diadem.
See'st not thou all men presage I shall be king?
Marsilius sends to me for peace; 
Mandricard puts off his cap, ten mile off: 
two things more, and then I cannot miss the crown.
I get the love of fair Angelica.
Now am I full of amorous conceits,
Not that I doubt to have what I desire,
But how I might best with mine honor woo:
Write, or entreat, fie, that fitteth not;
Send by ambassadors, no, that's too base;
Flatly command, ay, that's for Sacripant:
Say thou art Sacripant, and art in love,
In Africa dare say the county nay?
Fairer than Chloris when in all her pride
Bright Maia's son entrapped her in the net
Wherewith Vulcan entangled the god of war!
Prowess, or any means of treachery,
To put to death the traitorous Orlando.
The mighty Mandricard of Mexico.
Thou entertain that happy messenger,
Princes of France, the sparkling light of fame,
Whose glory's brighter than the burnished gates
From whence Latona's lordly son doth march,
When, mounted on his coach tinselled with flames,
He triumphs in the beauty of the heavens;
This is the place where Rodomont lies hid:
Here lies he, like the thief of Thessaly,
Which scuds abroad and searcheth for his prey,
And, being gotten, straight he gallops home,
As one that dares not break a spear in field.
But trust me, princes, I have girt his fort,
And I will sack it, or on this castle-wall
I'll write my resolution with my blood:
Why, sluggard, seest thou not Lycaon's son,
The hardy plough-swain unto mighty Jove,
Hath traced his silver furrows in the heavens.
And, turning home his over-watched team,
Gives leave unto Apollo's chariot?
I tell thee, sluggard, sleep is far unfit
For such as still have hammering in their heads
But only hope of honor and revenge:
These called me forth to rouse thy master up.
Tell him from me, false coward as he is,
That Orlando, the County Palatine,
Is come this morning, with a band of French,
To play him hunt's-up with a point of war:
I'll be his minstrel with my drum and fife;
Bid him come forth, and dance it if he dare,
Let fortune throw her favors where she list.
Frenchman, between half-sleeping and awake,
Although the misty veil strained over Cynthia
Hinders my sight from noting all thy crew,
Yet, for I know thee and thy straggling grooms
Can in conceit build castles in the sky,
But in your actions like the stammering Greek
Which breathes his courage bootless in the air,
I wish thee well, Orlando, get thee gone,
Say that a sentinel did suffer thee;
For if the round or court-of-guard should hear
Thou or thy men were braying at the walls,
Charles' wealth, the wealth of all his western mines,
Found in the mountains of Transalpine France,
Might not pay ransom to the king for thee.
Brave sentinel, if nature hath enchased
A sympathy of courage to thy tale,
And, like the champion of Andromache,
Thou, or thy master, dare come out the gates,
Maugre the watch, the round, or court-of-guard,
I will attend to abide the coward here.
If not, but still the craven sleeps secure,
Pitching his guard within a trench of stones,
Tell him his walls shall serve him for no proof,
But as the son of Saturn in his wrath
Pashed all the mountains at Typh≈ìus' head,
And topsy-turvy turned the bottom up,
So shall the castle of proud Rodomont.
And so, brave lords of France, let's to the fight.
I missed him near; 'twas time for him to trudge.
How now, my lord of Aquitain! My lord,
The court-of-guard is put unto the sword,
And all the watch that thought themselves so sure,
So that not one within the castle breathes.
Let's post amain to find out Rodomont,
And then in triumph march unto Marsilius.
I marvel, Medor, what my father means
To enter league with County Sacripant?
Madam, the king your father's wise enough;
He knows the county, like to Cassius,
Sits sadly dumping, aiming Caesar's death,
But, madam, mark a while, and you shall see
Your father shake him off from secrecy.
So much I guess; for when he willed I should
Give entertainment to the doting earl,
His speech was ended with a frowning smile.
Madam, see where he comes: I will be gone.
Well, that my lord so friendly is in league,
As honor wills him, with Marsilius.
What pleaseth my lord for to command.)
Then know, my love, I cannot paint my grief,
Nor tell a tale of Venus and her son,
Reporting such a catalogue of toys:
It fits not Sacripant to be effeminate.
Only give leave, my fair Angelica,
To say, the county is in love with thee.
Pardon, my lord; my loves are over-past:
So firmly is Orlando printed in my thoughts,
As love hath left no place for any else.
Why, over-weening damsel, see'st thou not
Thy lawless love unto this straggling mate
Hath filled our Afric regions full of blood?
And wilt thou still persevere in thy love?
Tush, leave the Palatine, and go with me.
Brave county, know, where sacred love unites,
The knot of gordian at the shrine of Jove
Was never half so hard or intricate
As be the bands which lovely Venus ties.
Sweet is my love; and, for I love, my lord,
Seek not unless, as Alexander did,
To cut the plough-swain's traces with thy sword,
Or slice the slender fillets of my life:
Or else, my lord, Orlando must be mine.
Stand I on love? stoop I to Venus' lure,
That never yet did fear the god of war?
Shall men report that County Sacripant
Held lovers' pains for pining passions?
Shall such a siren offer me more wrong
Than they did to the prince of Ithaca?
As he his ears, so, county, stop thine eye.
Go to your needle, lady, and your clouts;
Go to such milksops as are fit for love:
I will employ my busy brains for war.
Let not, my lord, denial breed offence:
Love doth allow her favors but to one,
Nor can there sit within the sacred shrine
Of Venus more than one installed heart.
Orlando is the gentleman I love,
And more than he may not enjoy my love.
Damsel, be gone: fancy hath taken leave;
Where I took hurt, there have I healed myself,
As those that with Achilles' lance were wounded,
Fetched help at self-same pointed spear.
Beauty gan brave, and beauty hath repulse;
And, beauty, get ye gone to your Orlando.
My lord, hath love amated him whose thoughts
Have ever been heroical and brave?
Stand you in dumps, like to the Myrmidon
Trapt in the tresses of Polyxena,
Who, mid the glory of his chivalry,
Sat daunted with a maid of Asia?
Think'st thou my thoughts are lunacies of love?
No, they are brands fired in Pluto's forge,
Where sits Tisiphone tempering in flames
Those torches that do set on fire revenge.
I loved the dame; but braved by her repulse,
Hate calls me on to quittance all my ills;
Which first must come by offering prejudice
O, how may that be brought to pass, my lord?
Thou see'st that Medor and Angelica
Are still so secret in their private walks,
Which well may breed suspicion of some love.
Now, than the French no nation under heaven
Is sooner touched with stings of jealousy.
Hard by, for solace, in a secret grove,
The county once a-day fails not to walk:
There solemnly he ruminates his love.
Upon those shrubs that compass-in the spring,
And on those trees that border-in those walks,
I'll slily have engraven on every bark
The names of Medor and Angelica.
Hard by, I'll have some roundelays hung up,
Wherein shall be some posies of their loves,
Fraughted so full of fiery passions
As that the county shall perceive by proof
Medor hath won his fair Angelica.
For thou like to a shepherd shalt be clothed,
With staff and bottle, like some country-swain
That tends his flocks feeding upon these downs.
There see thou buzz into the county's ears
That thou hast often seen within these woods
Base Medor sporting with Angelica;
And when he hears a shepherd's simple tale,
Or worse betide him through fond jealousy.
And mark thou how I will play the carver:
Therefore be gone, and make thee ready straight.
Thus all alone, and like a shepherd's swain,
As Paris, when Cenone loved him well,
Forgat he was the son of Priamus,
All clad in grey, sat piping on a reed;
So I transformed to this country shape,
Haunting these groves to work my master's will,
To plague the Palatine with jealousy,
And to conceit him with some deep extreme.
Here comes the man unto his wonted walk.
And bid the soldiers keep a court-of-guard,
So to hold watch till secret here alone
I meditate upon the thoughts of love.
Fair queen of love, thou mistress of delight,
Thou gladsome lamp that wait'st on Phoebe's train,
Spreading thy kindness through the jarring orbs,
That in their union praise thy lasting powers;
Thou that hast stayed the fiery Phlegon's course,
And mad'st the coachman of the glorious wain
To droop, in view of Daphne's excellence;
Fair pride of morn, sweet beauty of the even.
Look on Orlando languishing in love.
Sweet solitary groves, whereas the Nymphs
With pleasance laugh to see the Satyrs play,
Witness Orlando's faith unto his love.
Tread she these lawnds, kind Flora, boast thy pride.
Seek she for shade, spread, cedars, for her sake.
Fair Flora, make her couch amidst thy flowers.
Wash ye with roses when she longs to drink.
Smile, joy in her that my content hath wrought.
The heaven of love is but a pleasant hell,
Where none but foolish-wise imprisoned dwell.
Orlando, what contrarious thoughts be these,
That flock with doubtful motions in thy mind?
Heaven smiles, and trees do boast their summer pride.
What! Venus writes her triumphs here beside.
Yet when thine eye hath seen, thy heart shall rue
The tragic chance that shortly shall ensue.
[reads.] "Angelica:" ah, sweet and heavenly name,
Life to my life, and essence to my joy!
Unkind, and will she bend her thoughts to change?
Her name, her writing! Foolish and unkind!
No name of hers, unless the brooks relent
To hear her name, and Rhodanus vouchsafe
To raise his moistened locks from out the reeds,
And flow with calm alongst his turning bounds:
No name of hers, unless the Zephyr blow
Her dignities alongst Ardenia woods,
Where all the world for wonders do await.
And yet her name! for why Angelica;
But, mixed with Medor, not Angelica.
Only by me was loved Angelica,
Only for me must live Angelica.
I find her drift: perhaps the modest pledge
Of my content hath with a secret smile
And sweet disguise restrained her fancy thus,
Figuring Orlando under Medor's name;
Fine drift, fair nymph! Orlando hopes no less.
Yet more! are Muses masking in these trees,
Framing their ditties in conceited lines,
Making a goddess, in despite of me,
That have no other but Angelica?
 Poor hapless man, these thoughts contain thy hell!
[reads.] "Angelica is lady of his heart,
Angelica is substance of his joy,
Angelica is medicine of his smart,
Angelica hath healed his annoy."
Ah, false Angelica! What, have we more?
"Let groves, let rocks, let woods, let watery springs,
The cedar, cypress, laurel, and the pine,
Joy in the notes of love that Medor sings
Of those sweet looks, Angelica, of thine.
Then, Medor, in Angelica take delight,
Early, at morn, at noon, at even, and night."
Aetna, forsake the bounds of Sicily,
For now in me thy restless flames appear.
Refused, condemned, disdained! what worse than these?
What messenger hath Ate sent abroad
With idle looks to listen my laments?
Sirrah, who wronged happy nature so,
To spoil these trees with this Angelica?
Yet in her name, Orlando, they are blest.
I am a shepherd-swain, thou wandering knight,
That watch my flocks, not one that follow love.
As follow love! dar'st thou dispraise my heaven,
Or once disgrace or prejudice her name?
Is not Angelica the queen of love,
Decked with the compound wreath of Adon's flowers?
She is. Then speak, thou peasant, what is he
That dares attempt to court my queen of love,
Or I shall send thy soul to Charon's charge.
Brave knight, since fear of death enforceth still
In greater minds submission and relent,
Know that this Medor, whose unhappy name
Is mixed with the fair Angelica's,
Is even that Medor that enjoys her love.
Yon cave bears witness of their kind content;
Yon meadows talk the actions of their joy;
Our shepherds in their songs of solace sing,
"Angelica doth none but Medor love."
Angelica doth none but Medor love!
Shall Medor, then, possess Orlando's love?
Dainty and gladsome beams of my delight,
Delicious brows, why smile your heavens for those
That, wounding you, prove poor Orlando's foes?
Lend me your plaints, you sweet Arcadian nymphs,
That wont to sing your new-departed loves;
Thou weeping flood, leave Orpheus' wail for me;
And, Titan's nieces, gather all in one
Those fluent springs of your lamenting tears,
And let them stream along my faintfull looks.
 Now is the fire, late smothered in suspect,
Kindled, and burns within his angry breast:
Now have I done the will of Sacripant.
Fmineum servile genus, crudele, superbum:
Discourteous women, nature's fairest ill,
The woe of man, that first-created curse,
Whose words are shaded with enchanting wiles,
Worse than Medusa mateth all our minds;
And in their hearts sits shameless treachery,
Turning a truthless vile circumference.
O, could my fury paint their furies forth!
For hell's no hell, compared to their hearts,
Too simple devils to conceal their arts;
Born to be plagues unto the thoughts of men,
Brought for eternal pestilence to the world.
Villain, what art thou that followest me?
Alas, my lord, I am your servant, Orgalio.
That rann'st away with my Angelica.
Villain, provide me straight a lion's skin,
Thou see'st I now am mighty Hercules;
Look where's my massy club upon my neck.
To seek for Medor and Angelica,
You that are the rest, get you quickly away;
Provide ye horses all of burnished gold,
Saddles of cork, because I'll have them light;
For Charlemagne the great is up in arms,
And Arthur with a crew of Britons comes
To seek for Medor and Angelica
O, see, my lord, not any shrub but bears
The cursed stamp that wrought the county's rage.
If thou be'st mighty King Marsilius,
For whom the county would adventure life,
Revenge it on the false Angelica.
Trust me, Orgalio, Theseus in his rage
Did never more revenge his wronged Hippolytus
Than I will on the false Angelica.
Go to my court, and drag me Medor forth;
Tear from his breast the daring villain's heart.
Next take that base and damned adulteress,
I scorn to title her with daughter's name,
Put her in rags, and, like some shepherdess,
Exile her from my kingdom presently.
Delay not, good Orgalio, see it done.
How now, my friend! what fellow hast thou there?
That he is servant unto Mandricard.
It fits me not to sway the diadem,
Or rule the wealthy realms of Barbary,
To stain my thoughts with any cowardice.
Thy master braved me to my teeth,
He backed the Prince of Cuba for my foe;
For which nor he nor his shall scape my hands.
No, soldier, think me resolute as he.
It grieves me much that princes disagree,
Sith black repentance followeth afterward:
But leaving that, pardon me, gracious lord.
For thou entreat'st, and newly art arrived,
And yet thy sword is not imbrued in blood,
Upon conditions, I will pardon thee,
Nor any fellow-soldier of the camp,
That King Marsilius licensed thee depart:
He shall not think I am so much his friend,
That he or one of his shall scape my hand.
I swear, my lord, and vow to keep my word.
Mine, and none but mine, shall honor thee,
And safe conduct thee to Port Carthagene.
But say, my lord, if Mandricard were here,
What favor should he find, or life or death?
I tell thee, friend, it fits not for a king
To prize his wrath before his courtesy.
Were Mandricard, the King of Mexico,
In prison here, and craved but liberty,
So little hate hangs in Marsilius' breast,
As one entreaty should quite raze it out.
But this concerns not thee, therefore, farewell.
Thanks, and good fortune fall to such a king
As covets to be counted courteous.
The honor of thy foe disgraceth thee;
Thou wrongest him that wisheth thee but well;
Thou bringest store of men from Mexico
To battle him that scorns to injure thee,
Pawning his colors for thy warrantize.
Back to thy ships, and hie thee to thy home;
Budge not a foot to aid Prince Rodomont;
But friendly gratulate these favors found,
And meditate on naught but to be friends.
Seek the herb moly; for I must to hell,
To seek for Medor and Angelica.
Now to Charon, bid him dress his boat,
For he had never such a passenger.
Come, then, and I will give you weapons straight.
Thus causeless banished from thy native home,
Here sit, Angelica, and rest a while,
For to bewail the fortunes of thy love.
This way she went, and far she cannot be.
Fair shepherdess, for so thy sitting seems,
Or nymph, for less thy beauty cannot be,
What, feed you sheep upon these downs?
Daughter I am unto a bordering swain,
That tend my flocks within these shady groves.
Fond girl, thou liest; thou art Angelica.
Ay, thou art she that wronged the Palatine.
For I am known, albeit I am disguised,
Yet dare I turn the lie into thy throat,
Sith thou report'st I wronged the Palatine.
Nay, then, thou shalt be used according?
To thy deserts. Come, bring her to our tents.
Angelica, the fruits of all your love.
This is the city of great Babylon,
Where proud Darius was rebated from:
Play but the men, and I will lay my head,
We'll sack and raze it ere the sun be set.
No, no, thou shalt not be hurt, nor thee.
Back, soldiers; look where the enemy is.
Captain, they have a woman amongst them.
No, I am challenged the single fight.
Sirrah, is't you challenge me the combat?
Frantic companion, lunatic and wood,
Get thee hence, or else I vow by heaven,
Thy madness shall not privilege thy life.
I tell thee, villain, Medor wronged me so,
Sith thou art come his champion to the field,
I'll learn thee know I am the Palatine.
 Thanks, gentle fortune, that sends me such good hap,
Rather to die by him I love so dear,
Than live and see my lord thus lunatic.
[giving a sword.] 
If thou be'st come of Lancelot's worthy line,
Here, take this sword, and hie thee to the fight.
He cannot choose, being of your making.
Or else the torments that Ixion feels,
The rolling stone, the tubs of the Belides
Villain, wilt thou not find her out?
Alas, my lord, I know not where she is
Run to Charlemagne, spare for no cost;
Tell him, Orlando sent for Angelica.
As though that Sagittarius in his pride
Could take brave Leda from stout Jupiter!
And yet, forsooth, Medor, base Medor durst
Attempt to reave Orlando of his love.
Sirrah, you that are the messenger of Jove,
You that can sweep it through the milk-white path
That leads unto the senate-house of Mars,
Fetch me my shield tempered of purest steel,
Forged by the Cyclops for Anchises' son,
And see if I dare combat for Angelica.
Come away, and take heed you laugh not.
Why, art thou not that same Angelica,
With brows as bright as fair Erythea
That darks Canopus with her silver hue?
Are not these the beauteous cheeks
Wherein the lilies and the native rose
Sit equal-suited with a blushing red?
He makes a garden-plot in my face.
Are not, my dear, those the radiant eyes
Whereout proud Phoibus flasheth out his beams?
Why, strumpet, worse than Mars his trothless love,
Falser than faithless Cressida! strumpet, 
Brave peers of France, sith we have passed the bounds,
Whereby the wrangling billows seek for straits
To war with Tellus and her fruitful mines;
Sith we have furrowed through those wandering tides
Of Tyrrhene seas, and made our galleys dance
Upon the Hyperborean billows' crests,
That brave with streams the watery occident;
And found the rich and wealthy Indian clime
Sought-to by greedy minds for hurtful gold;
Now let us seek to venge the lamp of France
That lately was eclipsed in Angelica;
Now let us seek Orlando forth, our peer,
Though from his former wits lately estranged,
Yet famous in our favors as before;
And, sith by chance weall encountered be,
Let's seek revenge on her that wrought his wrong.
But being thus arrived in place unknown,
Who shall direct our course unto the court
Where brave Marsilius keeps his royal state?
Lo, here, two Indian palmers hard at hand,
Who can perhaps resolve our hidden doubts.
Palmers, God speed. Lordings, we greet you well.
Where lies Marsilius' court, friend, canst thou tell?
His court's his camp, the prince is now in arms.
What's he that dares annoy so great a king?
Such as both love and fury do confound:
Hath levied all his men, and traitor-like
Assails his lord and loving sovereign:
And Mandricard, who late hath been in arms
To prosecute revenge against Marsilius,
Is now through favors past become his friend.
Thus stands the state of matchless India.
Palmer, I like thy brave and brief discourse;
And, couldst thou bring us to the prince's camp,
We would acknowledge friendship at thy hands
Ye stranger lords, why seek ye out Marsilius?
In hope that he, whose empire is so large,
Will make both mind and monarchy agree.
Whence are you, lords, and what request you here?
A question over-haughty for thy weed,
Fit for the king himself for to propound.
O, sir, know that under simple weeds
The gods have masked: then deem not with disdain
To answer to this palmer's question,
Whose coat includes perhaps as great as yours.
Haughty their words, their persons full of state;
Though habit be but mean, their minds excell.
That princes are in India arrived,
Yea, even those western princely peers of France
That through the world adventures undertake,
To find Orlando late incensed with rage.
Then, palmers, sith you know our styles and state,
Advise us where your king Marsilius is.
Lordings of France, here is Marsilius,
That bids you welcome into India,
And will in person bring you to his camp.
Even Marsilius and thus disguised.
But what request these princes at my hand?
We sue for law and justice at thy hand:
We seek Angelica thy daughter out,
That wanton maid, that hath eclipsed the joy
Of royal France, and made Orlando mad.
My daughter, lords! why, she is exiled;
And her grieved father is content to lose
The pleasance of his age, to countenance law.
Not only exile shall await Angelica,
But death and bitter death shall follow her.
Then yield us right, Marsilius, or our swords
Shall make thee fear to wrong the peers of France.
Words cannot daunt me, princes, be assured;
But law and justice shall o'er-rule in this,
And I will bury father's name and love.
The hapless maid, banished from out my land,
Wanders about in woods and ways unknown:
Her, if ye find, with fury persecute;
I now disdain the name to be her father.
Lords of France, what would you more of me?
Marsilius, we commend thy princely mind,
And will report thy justice through the world.
Come, peers of France, let's seek Angelica,
Left for a spoil to our revenging thoughts.
Is not my love like those purple-colored swans
That gallop by the coach of Cynthia?
Is not her face silvered like that milk-white shape
That Jove came dancing in to Semele?
Then go thy ways, and climb up to the clouds,
And tell Apollo that Orlando sits
Making of verses for Angelica.
If he deny to send me down the shirt
Which Deianira sent to Hercules,
To make me brave upon my wedding-day,
I'll pass the Alps, and up to Meroe,
I know he knows that watery lakish hill,
And pull the harp out of the minstrel's hands,
And pawn it unto lovely Proserpine,
That she may fetch the fair Angelica.
But dost thou think the temper to be good?
When thus and thus we Medor do assail?
The pummel's well, the blade is curtal short:
O, that my lord would but conceit my tale!
Then would I speak and hope to find redress.
Else would I set my mouth to Tigris' streams,
And drink up overflowing Euphrates.
My eyes are heavy, and I needs must sleep.
That fill mine eyes with view of such regard
As heaven admires to see my slumbering dreams!
Skies are fulfilled with lamps of lasting joy,
That boast the pride of haught Latona's son,
Who lighteneth all the candles of the night.
Mnemosyne hath kissed the kingly Jove,
And entertained a feast within my brains,
Making her daughters solace on my brow.
Methinks, I feel how Cynthia tunes conceits
Of sad repent, and melloweth those desires
That frenzy scarce had ripened in my head.
Ate, I'll kiss thy restless cheek a while,
And suffer fruitless passion bide control.
O vos Silvani, Satyri, Faunique, deceque,
Nymphce Hamadryades, Dryades, Parcceque potentes!
O vos qui colitis lacusque locosque profundos,
Infernasque domus et nigra palatia Ditis!
Tuque Demogorgon, qui noctis fata gubernas,
Qui regis infernum solium, calumque, solumque!
Exaudite preces, filiasque auferte micantes;
In caput Orlandi celestes spargite lymphas,
Spargite, quis misere revocetur rapta per umbras
Orlandi infelix anima
What sights, what shapes, what strange-conceited dreams,
More dreadful than appeared to Hecuba
When fall of Troy was figured in her sleep!
Juno, methought, sent down from heaven by Jove,
Came swiftly sweeping through the gloomy air;
And calling Iris, sent her straight abroad
To summon Fauns, the Satyrs, and the Nymphs,
The Dryades, and all the demigods,
To secret council; [and, their] parle past,
She gave them vials full of heavenly dew.
Mounted upon her parti-colored coach,
Being drawn with peacocks proudly through the air,
She flew with Iris to the sphere of Jove.
What fearful thoughts arise upon this show!
What desert grove is this? How thus disguised?
A Fury, sure, worse than Megera was,
That reft her son from trusty Pylades.
Time not affords to tell each circumstance:
But thrice hath Cynthia changed her hue,
Since thou, infected with a lunacy,
Hast gadded up and down these lawnds and groves,
Performing strange and ruthful strategems,
All for the love of fair Angelica,
Whom thou with Medor didst suppose played false.
But Sacripant had graven these roundelays,
To sting thee with infecting jealousy:
The swain that told thee of their oft converse,
Was servant unto County Sacripant:
And trust me, Orlando, Angelica,
Though true to thee, is banished from the court,
This day bids battle to Marsilius.
The armies ready are to give assail;
And on a hill that overpeers them both
Stand all the worthy matchless peers of France,
Who are in quest to seek Orlando out.
Muse not at this, for I have told thee true.
I am she that cured thy disease.
Here take these weapons, given thee by the fates,
And hie thee, county, to the battle straight.
Thanks, sacred goddess, for thy helping hand.
Thither will I hie to be revenged.
For Sacripant, already crowned a king,
Heaves up his sword to have your diadems.
Traitor, not dead, nor any whit dismayed;
For dear we prize the smallest drop of blood.
Base not yourselves, to combat such a dog.
Mount on your coursers, follow those that fly,
Your conquering swords be tainted in their bloods:
Pass ye for him; he shall be combated.
I am, thou see'st, a mercenary soldier,
Homely attired, but of so haughty thoughts,
As naught can serve to quench th' aspiring flames,
That burn as do the fires of Sicily,
Unless I win that princely diadem,
That seems so ill upon thy coward's head.
To arms, sir boy! I will not brook these braves,
If Mars himself even from his fiery throne
Came armed with all his furnitures of war.
Then mayst thou think that Mars himself came down,
To vail thy plumes and heave thee from thy pomp.
Prove what thou art, I reck not of thy gree,
But I will have the conquest of my sword,
Which is the glory of thy diadem.
These words bewray thou art no base-born Moor,
But by descent sprung from some royal line:
Then freely tell me, what's thy name?
Then know that thou hast slain Prince Sacripant.
Then let me at thy dying day entreat,
By that some sphere wherein thy soul shall rest,
If Jove deny not passage to thy ghost,
Whether thou wrongedst Angelica or no?
O, that's the sting that pricks my conscience!
O, that's the hell my thoughts abhor to think!
I tell thee, knight, for thou dost seem no less,
That I engraved the roundelays on the trees,
And hung the schedules of poor Medor's love,
Then dead is the fatal author of my ill.
Base villain, vassal, unworthy of a crown,
Know that the man that struck the fatal stroke,
Is Orlando, the County Palatine,
Whom fortune sent to quittance all my wrongs.
Thou foiled and slain, it now behoves me straight
To hie me fast to massacre thy men:
And so, farewell, thou devil in shape of man.
As none might end the days of Sacripant
But mighty Orlando, rival of my love?
Now hold the fatal murderers of men
The sharpened knife ready to cut my thread,
Ending the scene of all my tragedy:
This day, this hour, this minute ends the days
Of him that lived worthy old Nestor's age.
Phebus, put on thy sable-suited wreath,
Clad all thy spheres in dark and mourning weeds:
Parched be the earth, to drink up every spring:
Let corn and trees be blasted from above;
Heaven turn to brass, and earth to wedge of steel;
The world to cinders. Mars, come thundering down,
And never sheath thy swift-revenging sword,
Till, like the deluge in Deucalion's days,
The highest mountains swim in streams of blood.
Heaven, earth, men, beasts, and every living thing,
Consume and end with County Sacripant!
Fought is the field, and Sacripant is slain,
With such a massacre of all his men,
As Mars, descending in his purple robe,
Vows with Bellona in whole heaps of blood
To banquet all the demigods of war.
See, where he lies slaughtered without the camp,
And by a simple swain, a mercenary,
Who bravely took the combat to himself:
Might I but know the man that did the deed,
I would, my lord, eternize him with fame.
Leaving the factious county to his death,
Command, my lord, his body be conveyed
Unto some place, as likes your highness best.
See, Marsilius, posting through Africa,
We have found this straggling girl, Angelica,
Who, for she wronged her love Orlando,
Chiefest of the western peers, conversing
With so mean a man as Medor was,
We will have her punished by the laws of France,
To end her burning lust in flames of fire.
Beshrew you, lordings, but you do your worst;
Fire, famine, and as cruel death
As fell to Nero's mother in his rage.
Father, if I may dare to call thee so,
And lords of France, come from the western seas,
In quest to find mighty Orlando out,
Yet, ere I die, let me have leave to say,
Angelica held ever in her thoughts
Most dear the love of County Palatine.
What wretch hath wronged us with suspect of lust,
I know not, I, nor can accuse the man;
But, by the heavens, whereto my soul shall fly,
Angelica did never wrong Orlando.
I speak not this as one that cares to live,
For why my thoughts are fully malcontent;
And I conjure you by your chivalry,
You quit Orlando's wrong upon Angelica.
This day thy soul shall vanish up in fire,
As Semele, when Juno wiled the trull
To entertain the glory of her love.
Frenchman, for so thy quaint array imports,
Be thou a peer, or be thou Charlemagne,
Or hadst thou Hector's or Achilles' heart,
Or never-daunted thoughts of Hercules,
That did in courage far surpass them all,
I tell thee, sir, thou liest in thy throat,
The greatest brave Transalpine France can brook,
In saying that sacred Angelica
Did offer wrong unto the Palatine.
I am a common mercenary soldier;
Yet, for I see my princess is abused
By new-come stragglers from a foreign coast,
I dare the proudest of these western lords
To crack a blade in trial of her right.
Why, foolish-hardy, daring, simple groom,
Follower of fond-conceited Phaeton,
Know'st thou to whom thou speak'st?
Brave soldier, for so much thy courage says,
These men are princes dipt within the blood
Of kings most royal, seated in the west,
Unfit to accept a challenge at your hand:
Yet thanks that thou wouldst in thy lord's defence
Fight for my daughter; but her guilt is known.
Ay, rest thee, soldier, Angelica is false,
False, for she hath no trial of her right:
Soldier, let me die for the 'miss of all.
Wert thou as stout as was proud Theseus,
In vain thy blade should offer my defence;
For why these be the champions of the world,
Twelve Peers of France that never yet were foiled.
To seal it on the shield of him that dares,
Malgrado of his honor, combat me.
Chastise the groom, Oliver, and learn him know
We are not like the boys of Africa.
You that so peremptorily bade him fight,
Prepare your weapons, for your turn is next:
'Tis not one champion can discourage me.
And, madam, if my fortune last it out,
I'll guard your person with Twelve Peers of France.
O Ogier, how canst thou stand, and see a slave
Disgrace the house of France? Sirrah, prepare you;
For angry Nemesis sits on my sword
Howe'er disguised in base or Indian shape,
Ogier can well discern thee by thy blows;
For either thou art Orlando or the devil.
[taking off his scarf.] 
Then, to assure you that I am no devil,
Here's your friend and companion, Orlando.
And none can be more glad than Ogier is,
That he hath found his cousin in his sense.
Whenas I felt his blows upon my shield,
My teeth did chatter, and my thoughts conceived,
Who might this be, if not the Palatine.
So had I said, but that report did tell
My lord was troubled with a lunacy.
So was I, lordings; but give me leave awhile,
Humbly as Mars did to his paramour,
So to submit to fair Angelica.
Pardon thy lord, fair saint Angelica,
Whose love, stealing by steps into extremes,
Grew by suspect to causeless lunacy.
O no, my lord, but pardon my amiss;
For had not Orlando loved Angelica,
Ne'er had my lord fall'n into these extremes,
Which we will parley private to ourselves.
Ne'er was the queen of Cyprus half so glad
As is Angelica to see her lord,
Her dear Orlando, settled in his sense.

But why stand the Prince of Africa,
And Mandricard the King of Mexico,
So deep in dumps, when all rejoice beside?
First know, my lord, I slaughtered Sacripant,
I am the man that did the slave to death;
Who frankly there did make confession,
That he engraved the roundelays on the trees,
And hung the schedules of poor Medor's love,
Intending by suspect to breed debate
Deeply 'twixt me and fair Angelica:
His hope had hap, but we had all the harm;
And now revenge leaping from out the seat
Of him that may command stern Nemesis,
Hath poured those treasons justly on his head.
I stand amazed, deep over-drenched with joy,
To hear and see this unexpected end:
So well I rest content.Ye peers of France,
Sith it is proved Angelica is clear,
Her and my crown I freely will bestow
Upon Orlando, the County Palatine.
Thanks, my good lord. And now, my friends of France,
Frolic, be merry: we will hasten home,
So soon as King Marsilius will consent
To let his daughter wend with us to France.
Meanwhile we'll richly rig up all our fleet
More brave than was that gallant Grecian keel
That brought away the Colchian fleece of gold.
Our sails of sendal spread into the wind;
Our ropes and tacklings all of finest silk,
Fetched from the native looms of laboring worms,
The pride of Barbary, and the glorious wealth
That is transported by the western bounds;
Our stems cut out of gleaming ivory;
Our planks and sides framed out of cypress-wood,
That bears the name of Cyparissus' change,
To burst the billows of the ocean-sea,
Where Phebus dips his amber tresses oft,
And kisses Thetis in the day's decline;
That Neptune proud shall call his Tritons forth
To cover all the ocean with a calm:
So rich shall be the rubbish of our barks,
Ta'en here for ballass to the ports of France,
That Charles himself shall wonder at the sight.
Thus, lordings, when our banquettings be done,
And Orlando espoused to Angelica,
We'll furrow through the moving ocean,
And cheerly frolic with great Charlemagne.



