<MA7VS> <Tam1-2 DF04 JEWM EDW2 MAPA DIDO> <TAM1vs>
From jigging veins of rhyming mother wits,
And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,
We'll lead you to the stately tent of War,
Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine
Threat'ning the world with high astounding terms
And scourging kingdoms with his conquering sword.
View but his picture in this tragic glass,
And then applaud his fortunes as you please.
Brother Cosroe, I find myself agrieved,
Yet insufficient to express the same,
For it requires a great and thund'ring speech.
Good brother, tell the cause unto my Lords;
I know you have a better wit than I.
Unhappy Persia, that in former age
Hast been the seat of mighty Conquerors,
That in their prowess and their policies
Have triumphed over Afric and the bounds
Of Europe, where the Sun dares scarce appear
For freezing meteors and congealed cold,
Now to be ruled and governed by a man
At whose birthday Cynthia with Saturn joined,
And Jove, the Sun, and Mercury denied
To shed their influence in his fickle brain!
Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at thee,
Meaning to mangle all thy Provinces.
Brother, I see your meaning well enough,
And through your Planets I perceive you think
I am not wise enough to be a king.
But I refer me to my noblemen
That know my wit, and can be witnesses.
I might command you to be slain for this.
Not for so small a fault, my sovereign Lord.
I mean it not, but yet I know I might.
Yet live; yea live; Mycetes wills it so.
Meander, thou, my faithful Counselor,
Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
Which is, (God knows), about that Tamburlaine,
That, like a Fox in midst of harvest time,
Doth prey upon my flocks of Passengers,
And, as I hear, doth mean to pull my plumes.
Therefore 'tis good and meet for to be wise.
Oft have I heard your Majesty complain
Of Tamburlaine, that sturdy Scythian thief
That robs your merchants of Persepolis,
Treading by land unto the Western Isles,
And in your confines with his lawless train
Daily commits incivil outrages,
Hoping (misled by dreaming prophecies)
To reign in Asia, and with barbarous Arms
To make himself the Monarch of the East.
But ere he march in Asia or display
His vagrant Ensign in the Persian fields,
Your Grace hath taken order by Theridamas,
Charged with a thousand horse, to apprehend
And bring him Captive to your Highness' throne.
Full true thou speak'st, and like thyself, my lord,
Whom I may term a Damon for thy love.
Therefore 'tis best, if so it like you all,
To send my thousand horse incontinent
To apprehend that paltry Scythian.
How like you this, my honorable Lords?
Is it not a kingly resolution?
It cannot choose, because it comes from you.
Then hear thy charge, valiant Theridamas,
The chiefest Captain of Mycetes' host,
The hope of Persia, and the very legs
Whereon our state doth lean, as on a staff
That holds us up and foils our neighbor foes.
Thou shalt be leader of this thousand horse,
Whose foaming gall, with rage and high disdain,
Have sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.
Go frowning forth, but come thou smiling home,
As did Sir Paris with the Grecian Dame.
Return with speed; time passeth swift away.
Our life is frail, and we may die today.
Before the Moon renew her borrowed light,
Doubt not, my Lord and gracious Sovereign,
But Tamburlaine and that Tartarian rout
Shall either perish by our warlike hands
Or plead for mercy at your highness' feet.
Go, stout Theridamas; thy words are swords,
And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes.
I long to see thee back return from thence,
That I may view these milk-white steeds of mine
All laden with the heads of killed men,
And from their knees even to their hoofs below
Besmeared with blood; that makes a dainty show.
Then now, my lord, I humbly take my leave.
Theridamas, farewell ten thousand times.
Ah, Menaphon, why stay'st thou thus behind
When other men press forward for renown?
Go, Menaphon, go into Scythia,
And foot by foot follow Theridamas.
Nay, pray you let him stay. a greater (task)
Fits Menaphon than warring with a Thief.
Create him Prorex of Africa,
That he may win the Babylonians' hearts,
Which will revolt from Persian government
Unless they have a wiser king than you.
Unless they have a wiser king than you?
These are his words; Meander, set them down.
And add this to them: that all Asia
Lament to see the folly of their King.
Well, here I swear by this my royal seat...
You may do well to kiss it then.
Embossed with silk as best beseems my state,
To be revenged for these contemptuous words.
O, where is duty and allegiance now?
Fled to the Caspian or the Ocean main?
What, shall I call thee brother? No, a foe,
Monster of Nature, shame unto thy stock,
That dar'st presume thy Sovereign for to mock.
Meander come. I am abused, Meander. 
How now, my lord? what, mated and amazed
To hear the king thus threaten like himself?
Ah, Menaphon, I pass not for his threats.
The plot is laid by Persian Noblemen
And Captains of the Medean garrisons
To crown me Emperor of Asia.
But this it is that doth excruciate
The very substance of my vexed soul:
To see our neighbors that were wont to quake
And tremble at the Persian Monarch's name
Now sit and laugh our regiment to scorn;
And that which might resolve me into tears,
Men from the farthest Equinoctial line
Have swarmed in troops into the Eastern India,
Lading their ships with gold and precious stones,
And made their spoils from all our provinces.
This should entreat your highness to rejoice,
Since Fortune gives you opportunity
To gain the title of a Conqueror
By curing of this maimed Empery.
Afric and Europe bordering on your land
And continent to your Dominions,
How easily may you with a mighty host
Pass into Graecia, as did Cyrus once,
And cause them to withdraw their forces home,
Lest you subdue the pride of Christendom.
But, Menaphon, what means this trumpet's sound?
Behold, my lord, Ortygius and the rest
Bringing the Crown to make you Emperor!
Magnificent and mighty Prince Cosroe,
We, in the name of other Persian states
And commons of this mighty Monarchy,
Present thee with th' Imperial Diadem.
The warlike Soldiers and the Gentlemen,
That heretofore have filled Persepolis
With Afric Captains taken in the field,
Whose ransom made them march in coats of gold,
With costly jewels hanging at their ears
And shining stones upon their lofty Crests,
Now living idle in the walled towns,
Wanting both pay and martial discipline,
Begin in troops to threaten civil war
And openly exclaim against the King.
Therefore, to stay all sudden mutinies,
We will invest your Highness Emperor,
Whereat the Soldiers will conceive more joy
Than did the Macedonians at the spoil
Of great Darius and his wealthy host.
Well, since I see the state of Persia droop
And languish in my brother's government,
I willingly receive th' imperial crown
And vow to wear it for my country's good,
In spite of them shall malice my estate.
And in assurance of desired success,
We here do crown thee Monarch of the East,
Emperor of Asia and Persia,
Great lord of Medea and Armenia,
Duke of Africa and Albania
Mesopotamia and of Parthia,
East India and the late discovered Isles,
Chief Lord of all the wide, vast Euxine sea,
And of the ever-raging Caspian Lake.
Long live Cosroe, mighty Emperor!
And Jove may never let me longer live
Than I may seek to gratify your love,
And cause the soldiers that thus honor me
To triumph over many Provinces;
By whose desires of discipline in Arms
I doubt not shortly but to reign sole king,
And with the Army of Theridamas,
Whither we presently will fly, (my Lords,)
To rest secure against my brother's force.
We knew, my lord, before we brought the crown,
Intending your investion so near
The residence of your despised brother,
The Lords would not be too exasperate
To injure or suppress your worthy title.
Or if they would, there are in readiness
Ten thousand horse to carry you from hence
In spite of all suspected enemies.
I know it well, my Lord, and thank you all.
Sound up the trumpets, then. God save the Ling!
Come lady, let not this appall your thoughts;
The jewels and the treasure we have ta'en
Shall be reserved, and you in better state
Than if you were arrived in Syria,
Even in the circle of your father's Arms,
The mighty Soldan of Egyptia.
Ah, Shepherd, pity my distressed plight
(If, as thou seem'st, thou art so mean a man,)
And seek not to enrich thy followers
By lawless rapine from a silly maid,
Who, traveling with these Medean Lords
To Memphis from my uncle's country of Medea,
Where all my youth I have been governed,
Have passed the army of the mighty Turk,
Bearing his privy signet and his hand
To safe conduct us through Africa.
And since we have arrived in Scythia,
Besides rich presents from the puissant Cham,
We have his highness' letters to command
Aid and assistance if we stand in need.
But now you see these letters and commands
Are countermanded by a greater man,
And through my provinces you must expect
Letters of conduct from my mightiness,
If you intend to keep your treasure safe,
But since I love to live at liberty,
As easily may you get the Soldan's crown
As any prizes out of my precinct.
For they are friends that help to wean my state,
Till men and kingdoms help to strengthen it,
And must maintain my life exempt from servitude.
But tell me, Madam, is your grace betrothed?
I am, my Lord, for so you do import.
I am a Lord, for so my deeds shall prove,
And yet a shepherd by my Parentage.
But, Lady, this fair face and heavenly hue
Must grace his bed that conquers Asia
And means to be a terror to the world,
Measuring the limits of his empery
By East and west, as Phoebus doth his course.
Lie here, ye weeds that I disdain to wear!
This complete armor and this curtle-axe
Are adjuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine.
And Madam, whatsoever you esteem
Of this success, and loss unvalued,
Both may invest you Empress of the East.
And these, that seem but silly country Swains,
May have the leading of so great an host
As with their weight shall make the mountains quake,
Even as when windy exhalations,
Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth.
As princely Lions when they rouse themselves,
Stretching their paws and threatening herds of beasts,
So in his Armor looketh Tamburlaine.
And making thee and me, Techelles, kings,
That even to death will follow Tamburlaine.
Nobly resolved, sweet friends and followers!
These Lords perhaps do scorn our estimates,
And think we prattle with distempered spirits,
But since they measure our deserts so mean,
That in conceit bear Empires on our spears,
Affecting thoughts coequal with the clouds,
They shall be kept our forced followers,
Till with their eyes they view us Emperors.
The Gods, defenders of the innocent,
Will never prosper your intended drifts,
That thus oppress poor friendless passengers.
Therefore at least admit us liberty,
Even as thou hop'st to be eternized
By living Asia's mighty Emperor.
I hope our Lady's treasure and our own
May serve for ransom to our liberties.
Return our Mules and empty Camels back,
That we may travel into Syria,
Where her betrothed Lord, Alcidamus,
Expects th' arrival of her highness' person.
And wheresoever we repose ourselves,
We will report but well of Tamburlaine.
Disdains Zenocrate to live with me?
Or you, my Lords, to be my followers?
Think you I weigh this treasure more than you?
Not all the Gold in India's wealthy arms
Shall buy the meanest soldier in my train.
Zenocrate, lovelier than the Love of Jove,
Brighter than is the silver Rhodope,
Fairer than whitest snow on Scythian hills,
Thy person is more worth to Tamburlaine
Than the possession of the Persian Crown,
Which gracious stars have promised at my birth.
A hundred Tartars shall attend on thee,
Mounted on Steeds swifter than Pegasus.
Thy Garments shall be made of Medean silk,
Enchased with precious jewels of mine own,
More rich and valorous than Zenocrate's.
With milk-white Harts upon an Ivory sled
Thou shalt be drawn amidst the frozen Pools,
And scale the icy mountains' lofty tops,
Which with thy beauty will be soon resolved.
My martial prizes, with five hundred men
Won on the fifty-headed Volga's waves,
Shall all we offer to Zenocrate,
And then myself to fair Zenocrate.
Techelles, women must be flattered.
But this is she with whom I am in love.
A thousand Persian horsemen are at hand,
Sent from the King to overcome us all.
How now, my Lords of Egypt and Zenocrate?
Now must your jewels be restored again,
And I that triumphed so be overcome?
How say you, Lordlings? is not this your hope?
We hope yourself will willingly restore them.
Such hope, such fortune, have the thousand horse.
Soft ye, my Lords, and sweet Zenocrate,
You must be forced from me ere you go.
A thousand horsemen! We five hundred foot!
An odds too great for us to stand against.
But are they rich? And is their armor good?
Their plumed helms are wrought with beaten gold,
Their swords enameled, and about their necks
Hang massy chains of gold down to the waist,
In every part exceeding brave and rich.
Then shall we fight courageously with them,
Or look you I should play the Orator?
No; cowards and faint-hearted runaways
Look for orations when the foe is near.
Our swords shall play the Orators for us.
Come, let us meet them at the mountain foot,
And with a sudden and an hot alarm
Drive all their horses headlong down the hill.
Stay, Techelles; ask a parley first.
Open the Mails; yet guard the treasure sure.
Lay out our golden wedges to the view,
That their reflections may amaze the Persians,
And look we friendly on them when they come.
But if they offer word or violence,
We'll fight, five hundred men-at-arms to one,
Before we part with our possession.
And 'gainst the General we will lift our swords,
And either lance his greedy thirsting throat,
Or take him prisoner, and his chain shall serve
For Manacles till he be ransomed home.
I hear them come. shall we encounter them?
Keep all your standings, and not stir a foot:
Myself will bide the danger of the brunt.
Where is this Scythian, Tamburlaine?
Whom seek'st thou, Persian? I am Tamburlaine.
Tamburlaine! A Scythian shepherd so embellished
With Nature's pride and richest furniture!
His looks do menace heaven and dare the Gods.
His fiery eyes are fixed upon the earth
As if he now devised some Stratagem,
Or meant to pierce Avernus' darksome vaults
To pull the triple-headed dog from hell.
Noble and mild this Persian seems to be,
If outward habit judge the inward man.
His deep affections make him passionate.
With what a majesty he rears his looks!
In thee, thou valiant man of Persia,
I see the folly of thy Emperor.
Art thou but Captain of a thousand horse,
That by Characters graven in thy brows,
And by thy martial face and stout aspect,
Deserv'st to have the leading of an host?
Forsake thy king and do but join with me,
And we will triumph over all the world.
I hold the Fates bound fast in iron chains,
And with my hand turn Fortune's wheel about,
And sooner shall the Sun fall from his Sphere
Than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome.
Draw forth thy sword, thou mighty man-at-arms,
Intending but to raze my charmed skin,
And Jove himself will stretch his hand from heaven
To ward the blow and shield me safe from harm.
See how he rains down heaps of gold in showers,
As if he meant to give my Soldiers pay;
And as a sure and grounded argument
That I shall be the Monarch of the East,
He sends this Soldan's daughter, rich and brave,
To be my Queen and portly Empress.
If thou wilt stay with me, renowned man,
And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct,
Besides thy share of this Egyptian prize,
Those thousand horse shall sweat with martial spoil
Of conquered kingdoms and of Cities sacked.
Both we will walk upon the lofty cliffs,
And Christian Merchants, that with Russian stems
Plow up huge furrows in the Caspian sea,
Shall vail to us as Lords of all the Lake.
Both we will reign as Consuls of the earth,
And mighty kings shall be our Senators.
Jove sometimes masked in a Shepherd's weed,
And by those steps that he hath scaled the heavens,
May we become immortal like the Gods.
Join with me now in this my mean estate,
(I call it mean because, being yet obscure,
The Nations far removed admire me not,)
And when my name and honor shall be spread
As far as Boreas claps his brazen wings,
Or fair Bootes sends his cheerful light,
Then shalt thou be Competitor with me,
And sit with Tamburlaine in all his majesty.
Not Hermes, Prolocutor to the Gods,
Could use persuasions more pathetical.
Nor are Apollo's Oracles more true
Than thou shalt find my vaunts substantial.
We are his friends, and if the Persian king
Should offer present Dukedoms to our state,
We think it loss to make exchange for that
We are assured of by our friend's success.
And kingdoms at the least we all expect,
Besides the honor in assured conquests,
Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords
And hosts of soldiers stand amazed at us,
When with their fearful tongues they shall confess
These are the men that all the world admires.
What strong enchantments tice my yielding soul!
Ah, these resolved noble Scythians!
But shall I prove a Traitor to my King?
No, but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine.
Won with thy words, and conquered with thy looks,
I yield myself, my men, and horse to thee,
To be partaker of thy good or ill,
As long as life maintains Theridamas.
Theridamas, my friend, take here my hand,
Which is as much as if I swore by heaven
And called the Gods to witness of my vow.
Thus shall my heart be still combined with thine,
Until our bodies turn to Elements,
And both our souls aspire celestial thrones.
Techelles and Casane, welcome him.
Welcome, renowned Persian, to us all.
Long may Theridamas remain with us.
These are my friends in whom I more rejoice
Than doth the King of Persia in his Crown;
And by the love of Pylades and Orestes,
Whose statues we adore in Scythia,
Thyself and them shall never part from me
Before I crown you kings in Asia.
Make much of them , gentle Theridamas,
And they will never leave thee till the death.
Nor thee, nor them, thrice noble Tamburlaine,
Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierced,
To do you honor and security.
A thousand thanks, worthy Theridamas.
And now, fair Madam, and my noble Lords,
If you will willingly remain with me,
You shall have honors as your merits be,
Or else you shall be forced with slavery.
We yield unto thee, happy Tamburlaine.
For you then, Madam, I am out of doubt.
I must be pleased perforce, wretched Zenocrate!
Thus far are we towards Theridamas
And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,
The man that in the forehead of his fortune
Bears figures of renown and miracle.
But tell me, that hast seen him, Menaphon,
What stature wields he, and what personage?
Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,
Like his desire, lift upwards and divine,
So large of limbs, his joints so strongly knit,
Such breadth of shoulders as might mainly bear
Old Atlas' burden. 'twixt his manly pitch,
A pearl more worth than all the world is placed,
Wherein by curious sovereignty of Art
Are fixed his piercing instruments of sight,
Whose fiery circles bear encompassed
A heaven of heavenly bodies in their Spheres,
That guides his steps and actions to the throne
Where honor sits invested royally.
Pale of complexion, wrought in him with passion,
Thirsting with sovereignty, with love of arms,
His lofty brows in folds do figure death,
And in their smoothness amity and life.
About them hangs a knot of Amber hair,
Wrapped in curls, as fierce Achilles' was,
On which the breath of heaven delights to play,
Making it dance with wanton majesty.
His arms and fingers, long and sinewy,
Betokening valor and excess of strength  -- 
In every part proportioned like the man
Should make the world subdued to Tamburlaine.
Well hast thou portrayed in thy terms of life
The face and personage of a wondrous man.
Nature doth strive with Fortune and his stars
To make him famous in accomplished worth,
And well his merits show him to be made
His Fortune's master and the king of men,
That could persuade, at such a sudden pinch,
With reasons of his valor and his life,
A thousand sworn and overmatching foes.
Then, when our powers in points of swords are joined,
And closed in compass of the killing bullet,
Though strait the passage and the port be made
That leads to Palace of my brother's life,
Proud is his fortune if we pierce it not.
And when the princely Persian Diadem
Shall overweigh his weary witless head
And fall, like mellowed fruit, with shakes of death,
In fair Persia noble Tamburlaine
Shall be my Regent and remain as King.
In happy hour we have set the Crown
Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honor
In joining with the man ordained by heaven
To further every action to the best.
He that with Shepherds and a little spoil
Durst, in disdain of wrong and tyranny,
Defend his freedom 'gainst a Monarchy,
What will he do supported by a king,
Leading a troop of Gentlemen and Lords,
And stuffed with treasure for his highest thoughts?
And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.
Our army will be forty thousand strong,
When Tamburlaine and brave Theridamas
Have met us by the river Araris;
And all conjoined to meet the witless King
That now is marching near to Parthia,
And with unwilling soldiers faintly armed,
To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine,
To whom, sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.
Come, my Meander, let us to this gear.
I tell you true, my heart is swoll'n with wrath
On this same thievish villain, Tamburlaine,
And of that false Cosroe, my traitorous brother.
Would it not grieve a King to be so abused
And have a thousand horsemen ta'en away?
And, which is worse, to have his Diadem
Sought for by such scald knaves as love him not?
I think it would. Well then, by heavens I swear,
Aurora shall not peep out of her doors,
But I will have Cosroe by the head
And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.
Tell you the rest, Meander; I have said.
Then, having passed Armenian deserts now,
And pitched our tents under the Georgian hills,
Whose tops are covered with Tartarian thieves
That lie in ambush, waiting for a prey,
What should we do but bid them battle straight
And rid the world of those detested troops,
Lest, if we let them linger here a while,
They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.
This country swarms with vile outrageous men
That live by rapine and by lawless spoil,
Fit Soldiers for the wicked Tamburlaine.
And he that could with gifts and promises
Inveigle him that led a thousand horse,
And make him false his faith unto his King,
Will quickly win such as are like himself.
Therefore cheer up your minds; prepare to fight.
He that can take or slaughter Tamburlaine
Shall rule the Province of Albania.
Who brings that Traitor's head, Theridamas,
Shall have a government in Medea,
Beside the spoil of him and all his train.
But if Cosroe (as our Spials say,
And as we know) remains with Tamburlaine,
His Highness' pleasure is that he should live
And be reclaimed with princely lenity.
An hundred horsemen of my company,
Scouting abroad upon these champion plains,
Have viewed the army of the Scythians,
Which make reports it far exceeds the King's.
Suppose they be in number infinite,
Yet being void of Martial discipline,
All running headlong after greedy spoils,
And more regarding gain than victory,
Like to the cruel brothers of the earth,
Sprung of the teeth of Dragons venomous,
Their careless swords shall lance their fellows' throats
And make us triumph in their overthrow.
Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say,
That sprung of teeth of Dragons venomous?
And 'tis a pretty toy to be a Poet.
Well, well, Meander, thou art deeply read,
And having thee, I have a jewel sure.
Go on, my Lord, and give your charge, I say.
Thy wit will make us Conquerors today.
Then, noble soldiers, to entrap these thieves
That live confounded in disordered troops,
If wealth or riches may prevail with them,
We have our Camels laden all with gold,
Which you that be but common soldiers
Shall fling in every corner of the field,
And while the base-born Tartars take it up,
You, fighting more for honor than for gold,
Shall massacre those greedy-minded slaves;
And when their scattered army is subdued,
And you march on their slaughtered carcasses,
Share equally the gold that bought their lives,
And live like Gentlemen in Persia.
Strike up the Drum and march courageously.
Fortune herself doth sit upon our Crests.
He tells you true, my masters; so he does.
Drums, why sound ye not when Meander speaks?
Now, worthy Tamburlaine, have I reposed
In thy approved Fortunes all my hope.
What think'st thou, man, shall come of our attempts?
For even as from assured oracle,
I take thy doom for satisfaction.
And so mistake you not a whit, my lord,
For Fates and Oracles of heaven have sworn
To royalize the deeds of Tamburlaine,
And make them blest that share in his attempts.
And doubt you not but, if you favor me
And let my Fortunes and my valor sway
To some direction in your martial deeds,
The world will strive with hosts of men-at-arms
To swarm unto the Ensign I support.
The hosts of Xerxes, which by fame is said
To drink the mighty Parthian Araris,
Was but a handful to that we will have.
Our quivering Lances shaking in the air
And bullets like Jove's dreadful Thunderbolts,
Enrolled in flames and fiery smoldering mists,
Shall threat the Gods more than Cyclopian wars;
And with our Sun-bright armor, as we march
We'll chase the Stars from heaven and dim their eyes
That stand and muse at our admired arms.
You see, my Lord, what working words he hath,
But when you see his actions top his speech,
Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth
As I shall be commended and excused
For turning my poor charge to his direction.
And these, his two renowned friends, my Lord,
Would make one thrust and strive to be retained
In such a great degree of amity.
With duty and with amity we yield
Our utmost service to the fair Cosroe.
Which I esteem as portion of my crown.
Usumcasane and Techelles both,
When she that rules in Rhamnis' golden gates
And makes a passage for all prosperous Arms
Shall make me solely Emperor of Asia,
Then shall your meeds and valors be advanced
To rooms of honor and Nobility.
Then haste, Cosroe, to be king alone,
That I with these my friends and all my men
May triumph in our long expected Fate.
The King, your Brother, is now hard at hand;
Meet with the fool, and rid your royal shoulders
Of such a burden as outweighs the sands
And all the craggy rocks of Caspia.
My lord, we have discovered the enemy
Ready to charge you with a mighty army.
Come, Tamburlaine, now whet thy winged sword,
And lift thy lofty arm into the clouds,
That it may reach the King of Persia's crown
And set it safe on my victorious head.
See where it is, the keenest Curtle-axe
That e'er made passage through Persian Arms.
These are the wings shall make it fly as swift
As doth the lightning or the breath of heaven,
And kill as sure as it swiftly flies.
Thy words assure me of kind success.
Go, valiant Soldier, go before and charge
The fainting army of that foolish King.
Usumcasane and Techelles, come.
We are enough to scare the enemy,
And more than needs to make an emperor.
Accursed be he that first invented war!
They knew not, ah, they knew not, simple men,
How those were hit by pelting Cannon shot
Stand staggering like a quivering Aspen leaf
Fearing the force of Boreas' boisterous blasts.
In what a lamentable case were I,
If Nature had not given me wisdom's lore,
For Kings are clouts that every man shoots at,
Our Crown the pin that thousands seek to cleave.
Therefore in policy I think it good
To hide it close  --  a goodly Stratagem,
And far from any man that is a fool.
So shall not I be known, or if I be,
They cannot take away my crown from me.
Here will I hide it in this simple hole.
What, fearful coward! straggling from the camp,
When Kings themselves are present in the field?
Thou liest.  Base villain, dar'st thou give the lie?
Away! I am the King. go! touch me not!
Thou break'st the law of Arms, unless thou kneel
And cry me, "mercy, noble King!"
Are you the witty King of Persia?
Ay, marry, am I. have you any suit to me?
I would entreat you to speak but three wise words.
Come, give it me.  No; I took it prisoner.
You lie; I gave it you.  Then 'tis mine.
No; I mean, I let you keep it.
Well, I mean you shall have it again.
Here, take it for a while; I lend it thee
Till I may see thee hemmed with armed men.
Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head;
Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine.
O Gods, is this Tamburlaine the thief?
I marvel much he stole it not away.
Hold thee, Cosroe; wear two imperial Crowns.
Think thee invested now as royally,
Even by the mighty hand of Tamburlaine,
As if as many kings as could encompass thee
With greatest pomp, had crowned thee Emperor.
So do I, thrice renowned man-at-arms,
And none shall keep the crown but Tamburlaine.
Thee do I make my Regent of Persia
And General Lieutenant of my Armies.
Meander, you that were our brother's Guide,
And chiefest Counselor in all his acts,
Since he is yielded to the stroke of War,
On your submission we with thanks excuse
And give you equal place in our affairs.
Most happy emperor, in humblest terms
I vow my service to your Majesty,
With utmost virtue of my faith and duty.
Thanks, good Meander. then, Cosroe, reign
And govern Persia in her former pomp.
Now send Embassage to thy neighbor Kings,
And let them know the Persian King is changed
From one that knew not what a King should do
To one that can command what 'longs thereto.
And now we will to fair Persepolis
With twenty thousand expert soldiers.
The Lords and Captains of my brother's camp
With little slaughter take Meander's course,
And gladly yield them to my gracious rule.
Ortygius and Menaphon, my trusty friends,
Now will I gratify your former good
And grace your calling with a greater sway.
And as we ever aimed at your behoof,
And sought your state all honor it deserved,
So will we with our powers and our lives
Endeavor to preserve and prosper it.
I will not thank thee, sweet Ortygius;
Better replies shall prove my purposes.
And now, Lord Tamburlaine, my brother's Camp
I leave to thee and to Theridamas,
To follow me to fair Persepolis.
Then will we march to all those Indian Mines
My witless brother to the Christians lost,
And ransom them with fame and usury.
And till thou overtake me, Tamburlaine,
(Staying to order all the scattered troops,)
Farewell, Lord Regent and his happy friends.
I long to sit upon my brother's throne.
Your Majesty shall shortly have your wish,
And ride in triumph through Persepolis. 
And ride in triumph through Persepolis!
Is it not brave to be a King, Techelles?
Usumcasane and Theridamas,
Is it not passing brave to be a King,
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?
O, my Lord, 'tis sweet and full of pomp.
To be a King is half to be a God.
A god is not so glorious as a King.
I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven
Cannot compare with kingly joys in earth:
To wear a Crown enchased with pearl and gold,
Whose virtues carry with it life and death;
To ask and have, command and be obeyed;
When looks breed love, with looks to gain the prize,
Such power attractive shines in princes' eyes.
Why, say, Theridamas, wilt thou be a king?
Nay: though I praise it, I can live without it.
What say my other friends? will you be kings?
Ay, if I could, with all my heart, my Lord.
Why, that's well said, Techelles: so would I.
And so would you, my masters, would you not?
Why then, Casane, shall we wish for aught
The world affords in greatest novelty
And rest attemptless, faint and destitute?
Methinks we should not. I am strongly moved,
That if I should desire the Persian Crown,
I could attain it with a wondrous ease;
And would not all our soldiers soon consent,
If we should aim at such a dignity?
I know they would with our persuasions.
Why, then, Theridamas, I'll first assay
To get the Persian Kingdom to myself;
Then thou for Parthia; they for Scythia and Medea;
And if I prosper, all shall be as sure
As if the Turk, the Pope, Afric, and Greece
Came creeping to us with their crowns apace.
Then shall we send to this triumphing King,
And bid him battle for his novel Crown?
Nay, quickly then, before his room be hot.
'Twill prove a pretty jest, in faith, my friends.
A jest to charge on twenty thousand men?
I judge the purchase more important far.
Judge by thyself, Theridamas, not me,
For presently Techelles here shall haste
To bid him battle ere he pass too far
And lose more labor than the gain will quite.
Then shalt thou see the Scythian Tamburlaine
Make but a jest to win the Persian crown.
Techelles, take a thousand horse with thee,
And bid him turn him back to war with us,
That only made him King to make us sport.
We will not steal upon him cowardly,
But give him warning and more warriors.
Haste thee, Techelles; we will follow thee.
What saith Theridamas?  Go on, for me. 
What means this devilish shepherd to aspire
With such a Giantly presumption,
To cast up hills against the face of heaven,
And dare the force of angry Jupiter?
But as he thrust them underneath the hills,
And pressed out fire from their burning jaws,
So will I send this monstrous slave to hell,
Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul.
Some powers divine, or else infernal, mixed
Their angry seeds at his conception,
For he was never sprung of human race,
Since with the spirit of his fearful pride,
He dares so doubtlessly resolve of rule,
And by profession be ambitious.
What God, or Fiend, or spirit of the earth,
Or Monster turned to a manly shape,
Or of what mold or mettle he be made,
What star or state soever govern him,
Let us put on our meet encountering minds,
And in detesting such a devilish Thief,
In love of honor and defense of right
Be armed against the hate of such a foe,
Whether from earth, or hell, or heaven he grow.
Nobly resolved, my good Ortygius,
And since we all have sucked one wholesome air,
And with the same proportion of Elements
Resolve, I hope we are resembled,
Vowing our loves to equal death and life.
Let's cheer our soldiers to encounter him,
That grievous image of ingratitude,
That fiery thirster after Sovereignty,
And burn him in the fury of that flame
That none can quench but blood and Empery.
Resolve, my Lords and loving soldiers, now
To save your King and country from decay.
Then strike up, Drum; and all the Stars that make
The loathsome Circle of my dated life,
Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart,
That thus opposeth him against the Gods,
And scorns the Powers that govern Persia.
Barbarous and bloody Tamburlaine,
Thus to deprive me of my crown and life!
Treacherous and false Theridamas,
Even at the morning of my happy state,
Scarce being seated in my royal throne,
To work my downfall and untimely end!
An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul,
And death arrests the organ of my voice,
Who, entering at the breach thy sword hath made,
Sacks every vein and artery of my heart.
Bloody and insatiate Tamburlaine!
The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown,
That caused the eldest son of heavenly Ops
To thrust his doting father from his chair,
And place himself in the Empyreal heaven,
Moved me to manage arms against thy state.
What better precedent than mighty Jove?
Nature, that framed us of four Elements
Warring within our breasts for regiment,
Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds.
Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
The wondrous Architecture of the world
And measure every wandering planet's course,
Still climbing after knowledge infinite,
And always moving as the restless Spheres,
Will us to wear ourselves and never rest,
Until we reach the ripest fruit of all,
That perfect bliss and sole felicity,
The sweet fruition of an earthly crown.
And that made me to join with Tamburlaine,
For he is gross and like the massy earth
That moves not upwards, nor by princely deeds
Doth mean to soar above the highest sort.
And that made us, the friends of Tamburlaine,
To lift our swords against the Persian King.
For as when Jove did thrust old Saturn down,
Neptune and Dis gained each of them a Crown,
So do we hope to reign in Asia,
If Tamburlaine be placed in Persia.
The strangest men that ever nature made!
I know not how to take their tyrannies.
My bloodless body waxeth chill and cold,
And with my blood my life slides through my wound;
My soul begins to take her flight to hell
And summons all my senses to depart.
The heat and moisture which did feed each other,
For want of nourishment to feed them both,
Are dry and cold; and now doth ghastly death
With greedy talons gripe my bleeding heart
And like a Harpy tires on my life.
Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die  -- 
And fearful vengeance light upon you both!
Not all the curses which the furies breathe
Shall make me leave so rich a prize as this.
Theridamas, Techelles, and the rest,
Who think you now is king of Persia?
Tamburlaine! Tamburlaine!
Though Mars himself, the angry god of arms,
And all the earthly Potentates conspire
To dispossess me of this Diadem,
Yet will I wear it in despite of them,
As great commander of this Eastern world,
If you but say that Tamburlaine shall reign.
Long live Tamburlaine, and reign in Asia!
So; now it is more surer on my head
Than if the Gods had held a Parliament,
And all pronounced me king of Persia.
Great Kings of Barbary and my portly Bassoes,
We hear the Tartars and the Eastern thieves,
Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine,
Presume a bickering with your Emperor,
And think to rouse us from our dreadful siege
Of the famous Grecian Constantinople.
You know our Army is invincible;
As many circumcised Turks we have,
And warlike bands of Christians renied,
As hath the Ocean or the Terrene sea
Small drops of water when the Moon begins
To join in one her semicircled horns.
Yet would we not be braved with foreign power,
Nor raise our siege before the Grecians yield
Or breathless lie before the city walls.
Renowned Emperor and mighty General,
What if you sent the Bassoes of your guard
To charge him to remain in Asia,
Or else to threaten death and deadly arms
As from the mouth of mighty Bajazeth?
Hie thee, my Basso, fast to Persia.
Tell him thy Lord, the Turkish Emperor,
Dread Lord of Afric, Europe, and Asia,
Great king and conqueror of Graecia,
The Ocean, Terrene, and the coal-black sea,
The high and highest Monarch of the world,
Wills and commands, (for say not, I entreat,)
Not once to set his foot in Africa,
Or spread his colors in Graecia,
Lest he incur the fury of my wrath.
Tell him I am content to take a truce,
Because I hear he bears a valiant mind;
But if, presuming on his silly power,
He be so mad to manage Arms with me,
Then stay thou with him, - say, I bid thee so  -- 
And if, before the Sun save measured heaven
With triple circuit, thou regreet us not,
We mean to take his morning's next arise
For messenger he will not be reclaimed,
And mean to fetch thee in despite of him.
Most great and puissant Monarch of the earth,
Your Basso will accomplish your behest
And show your pleasure to the Persian,
As fits the Legate of the stately Turk.
They say he is the king of Persia;
But if he dare attempt to stir your siege,
'Twere requisite he should be ten times more,
For all flesh quakes at your magnificence.
True, Argier, and trembles at my looks.
The spring is hindered by your smothering host,
For neither rain can fall upon the earth,
Nor Sun reflex his virtuous beams thereon,
The ground is mantled with such multitudes.
All this is true as holy Mahomet,
And all the trees are blasted with our breaths.
What thinks your greatness best to be achieved
In pursuit of the City's overthrow?
I will the captive Pioners of Argier
Cut off the water that by leaden pipes
Runs to the city from the mountain Carnon.
Two thousand horse shall forage up and down,
That no relief or succor come by Land,
And all the sea my Galleys countermand.
Then shall our footmen lie within the trench,
And with their Cannons mouthed like Orcus' gulf,
Batter the walls, and we will enter in;
And thus the Grecians shall be conquered. 
Madam Zenocrate, may I presume
To know the cause of these unquiet fits
That work such trouble to your wonted rest?
'tis more than pity such a heavenly face
Should by heart's sorrow wax so wan and pale,
When your offensive rape by Tamburlaine,
(Which of your whole displeasures should be most)
Hath seemed to be digested long ago.
Although it be digested long ago,
As his exceeding favors have deserved,
And might content the Queen of heaven as well
As it hath changed my first-conceived disdain;
Yet, since a farther passion feeds my thoughts
With ceaseless and disconsolate conceits.
Which dyes my looks so lifeless as they are,
And might, if my extremes had full events,
Make me the ghastly counterfeit of death.
Eternal heaven sooner be dissolved,
And all that pierceth Phoebe's silver eye,
Before such hap fall to Zenocrate!
Ah, life and soul, still hover in his Breast,
And leave my body senseless as the earth,
Or else unite you to his life and soul,
That I may live and die with Tamburlaine!
With Tamburlaine? Ah, fair Zenocrate,
Let not a man so vile and barbarous,
That holds you from your father in despite
And keeps you from the honors of a Queen,
(Being supposed his worthless Concubine,)
Be honored with your love, but for necessity.
So, now the mighty Soldan hears of you,
Your Highness needs not doubt but in short time
He will, with Tamburlaine's destruction,
Redeem you from this deadly servitude.
Leave to wound me with these words,
And speak of Tamburlaine as he deserves.
The entertainment we have had of him
Is far from villainy or servitude,
And might in noble minds be counted princely.
How can you fancy one that looks so fierce,
Only disposed to martial Stratagems?
Who, when he shall embrace you in his arms,
Will tell how many thousand men he slew,
And, when you look for amorous discourse,
Will rattle forth his facts of war and blood,
Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears.
As looks the sun through Nilus' flowing stream,
Or when the morning holds him in her arms,
So looks my Lordly love, fair Tamburlaine;
His talk much sweeter than the Muses' song
They sung for honor 'gainst Pierides,
Or when Minerva did with Neptune strive;
And higher would I rear my estimate
Than Juno, sister to the highest God,
If I were matched with mighty Tamburlaine.
Yet be not so inconstant in your love,
But let the young Arabian live in hope,
After your rescue to enjoy his choice.
You see, though first the King of Persia,
Being a Shepherd, seemed to love you much,
Now, in his majesty, he leaves those looks,
Those words of favor, and those comfortings,
And gives no more than common courtesies.
Thence rise the tears that so distain my cheeks,
Fearing his love through my unworthiness.
Betrayed by fortune and suspicious love,
Threatened with frowning wrath and jealousy,
Surprised with fear of hideous revenge,
I stand aghast; but most astonied
To see his choler shut in secret thoughts,
And wrapt in silence of his angry soul.
Upon his brows was portrayed ugly death,
And in his eyes the fury of his heart,
That shine as Comets, menacing revenge,
And cast a pale complexion on his cheeks.
As when the Seaman sees the Hyades
Gather an army of Cimmerian clouds,
(Auster and Aquilon with winged Steeds,
All sweating, tilt about the watery heavens,
With shivering spears enforcing thunderclaps,
And from their shields strike flames of lightning)
All fearful folds his sails and sounds the main,
Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aid
Against the terror of the winds and waves,
So fares Agydas for the late-felt frowns
That sent a tempest to my daunted thoughts
And make my soul divine her overthrow.
See you, Agydas, how the King salutes you.
He bids you prophesy what it imports. 
I prophesied before, and now I prove
The killing frowns of jealousy and love.
He needed not with words confirm my fear,
For words are vain where working tools present
The naked action of my threatened end.
It says, Agydas, thou shalt surely die,
And of extremities elect the least.
More honor and less pain it may procure,
To die by this resolved hand of thine
Than stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.
Then haste, Agydas, and prevent the plagues
Which thy prolonged Fates may draw on thee.
Go wander free from fear of Tyrant's rage,
Removed from the Torments and the hell
Wherewith he may excruciate thy soul,
And let Agydas by Agydas die,
And with this stab slumber eternally.
Usumcasane see, how right the man
Hath hit the meaning of my Lord and King.
Faith, and Techelles, it was manly done;
And, since he was so wise and honorable,
Let us afford him now the bearing hence,
And crave his triple-worthy burial.
Agreed, Casane; we will honor him.
Basso, by this thy Lord and master knows
I mean to meet him in Bithynia.
See, how he comes! Tush, Turks are full of brags
And menace more than they can well perform.
He meet me in the field and fetch thee hence!
Alas, poor Turk, his fortune is too weak
T' encounter with the strength of Tamburlaine.
View well my Camp, and speak indifferently:
Do not my captains and my soldiers look
As if they meant to conquer Africa?
Your men are valiant, but their number few,
And cannot terrify his mighty host.
My lord, the great Commander of the world,
Besides fifteen contributory kings,
Hath now in arms ten thousand Janizaries,
Mounted on lusty Mauritanian Steeds,
Brought to the war by men of Tripoli;
Two hundred thousand footmen that have served
In two set battles fought in Graecia;
And for the expedition of this war,
If he think good, can from his garrisons
Withdraw as many more to follow him.
The more he brings, the greater is the spoil,
For when they perish by our warlike hands,
We mean to set our footmen on their Steeds
And rifle all those stately Janizars.
But will those Kings accompany your Lord?
Such as his Highness please; but some must stay
To rule the provinces he late subdued.
Then fight courageously; their crowns are yours.
This hand shall set them on your conquering heads,
That made me Emperor of Asia.
Let him bring millions infinite of men,
Unpeopling Western Africa and Greece,
Yet we assure us of the victory.
Even he, that in a trice vanquished two kings
More mighty than the Turkish Emperor,
Shall rouse him out of Europe and pursue
His scattered army till they yield or die.
Well said, Theridamas! speak in that mood,
For 'Will' and 'Shall' best fitteth Tamburlaine,
Whose smiling stars give him assured hope
Of martial triumph, ere he meet his foes.
I that am termed the Scourge and Wrath of God,
The only fear and terror of the world,
Will first subdue the Turk, and then enlarge
Those Christian Captives which you keep as slaves,
Burdening their bodies with your heavy chains,
And feeding them with thin and slender fare,
That naked row about the Terrene sea,
And, when they chance to breathe and rest a space,
Are punished with Bastones so grievously
That they lie panting on the Galley's side,
And strive for life at every stroke they give.
These are the cruel pirates of Argier,
That damned train, the scum of Africa,
Inhabited with straggling Runagates,
That make quick havoc of the Christian blood.
But, as I live, that town shall curse the time
That Tamburlaine set foot in Africa.
Bassoes and Janizaries of my Guard,
Attend upon the person of your Lord,
The greatest Potentate of Africa.
Techelles and the rest, prepare your swords;
I mean t' encounter with that Bajazeth.
Kings of Fez, Morocco, and Argier,
He calls me Bajazeth, whom you call Lord!
Note the presumption of this Scythian slave!
I tell thee, villain, those that lead my horse
Have to their names titles of dignity,
And dar'st thou bluntly call me Bajazeth?
And know thou, Turk, that those which lead my horse
Shall lead thee Captive through Africa,
And dar'st thou bluntly call me Tamburlaine?
By Mahomet my Kinsman's sepulchre,
And by the holy Alcoran I swear,
He shall be made a chaste and lustless Eunuch,
And in my Sarell tend my Concubines;
And all his Captains, that thus stoutly stand,
Shall draw the chariot of my Empress,
Whom I have brought to see their overthrow.
By this my sword that conquered Persia,
Thy fall shall make me famous through the world.
I will not tell thee how I'll handle thee,
But every common soldier of my Camp
Shall smile to see thy miserable state.
What means the mighty Turkish emperor
To talk with one so base as Tamburlaine?
Ye Moors and valiant men of Barbary,
How can ye suffer these indignities?
Leave words, and let them feel your lances' points,
Which glided through the bowels of the Greeks.
Well said, my stout contributory kings.
Your threefold army and my hugy host
Shall swallow up these base-born Persians.
Puissant, renowned, and mighty Tamburlaine,
Why stay we thus prolonging all their lives?
I long to see those crowns won by our swords,
That we may reign as kings of Africa.
What Coward would not fight for such a prize?
Fight all courageously, and be you kings.
I speak it, and my words are oracles.
Zabina, mother of three braver boys
Than Hercules, that in his infancy
Did pash the jaws of Serpents venomous,
Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike Lance,
Their shoulders broad, for complete armor fit,
Their limbs more large and of a bigger size
Than all the brats y-sprung from Typhon's loins,
Who, when they come unto their father's age,
Will batter Turrets with their manly fists  -- 
Sit here upon this royal chair of state,
And on thy head wear my Imperial crown,
Until I bring this sturdy Tamburlaine
And all his Captains bound in captive chains.
Such good success happen to Bajazeth!
Zenocrate, the loveliest Maid alive,
Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
The only Paragon of Tamburlaine,
Whose eyes are brighter than the Lamps of heaven
And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony,
That with thy looks canst clear the darkened Sky
And calm the rage of thundering Jupiter  -- 
Sit down by her, adorned with my Crown,
As if thou wert the Empress of the world.
Stir not, Zenocrate, until thou see
Me march victoriously with all my men,
Triumphing over him and these his kings,
Which I will bring as Vassals to thy feet.
Till then, take thou my crown, vaunt of my worth,
And manage words with her, as we will arms.
And may my Love, the king of Persia,
Return with victory and free from wound!
Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms,
Which lately made all Europe quake for fear.
I have of Turks, Arabians, Moors, and Jews,
Enough to cover all Bithynia.
Let thousands die! their slaughtered Carcasses
Shall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest;
And as the heads of Hydra, so my power,
Subdued, shall stand as mighty as before.
If they should yield their necks unto the sword,
Thy soldiers' arms could not endure to strike
So many blows as I have heads for thee.
Thou know'st not, (foolish hardy Tamburlaine,)
What 'tis to meet me in the open field,
That leave no ground for thee to march upon.
Our conquering swords shall marshal us the way
We use to march upon the slaughtered foe,
Trampling their bowels with our horses' hoofs,
Brave horses bred on the white Tartarian hills.
My Camp is like to Julius Caesar's Host,
That never fought but had the victory;
Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war
As these, my followers, willingly would have.
Legions of Spirits, fleeting in the air,
Direct our Bullets and our weapons' points,
And make your strokes to wound the senseless air;
And when she sees our bloody Colors spread,
Then Victory begins to take her flight,
Resting herself upon my milk-white Tent.
But come, my Lords, to weapons let us fall;
The field is ours, the Turk, his wife, and all.
Come, Kings and Bassoes, let us glut our swords,
That thirst to drink the feeble Persians' blood.
Base Concubine, must thou be placed by me
That am the Empress of the mighty Turk?
Disdainful Turkess, and unreverend Boss,
Call'st thou me Concubine, that am betrothed
Unto the great and mighty Tamburlaine?
To Tamburlaine, the great Tartarian thief!
Thou wilt repent these lavish words of thine
When thy great Basso-master and thyself
Must plead for mercy at his kingly feet,
And sue to me to be your Advocate.
And sue to thee? I tell thee, shameless girl,
Thou shalt be Laundress to my waiting maid.
How lik'st thou her, Ebea? will she serve?
Madam, she thinks perhaps she is too fine,
But I shall turn her into other weeds
And make her dainty fingers fall to work.
Hear'st thou, Anippe, how thy drudge doth talk,
And how my slave, her mistress, menaceth?
Both for their sauciness shall be employed
To dress the common soldiers' meat and drink,
For we will scorn they should come near ourselves.
Yet sometimes let your highness send for them
To do the work my chambermaid disdains.
Ye gods and powers that govern Persia,
And made my lordly Love her worthy King,
Now strengthen him against the Turkish Bajazeth,
And let his foes, like flocks of fearful Roes
Pursued by hunters, fly his angry looks,
That I may see him issue Conqueror.
Now, Mahomet, solicit God himself,
And make him rain down murdering shot from heaven
To dash the Scythians' brains, and strike them dead
That dare to manage arms with him
That offered jewels to thy sacred shrine
When first he warred against the Christians.
By this the Turks lie weltering in their blood,
And Tamburlaine is Lord of Africa.
Thou art deceived. I heard the Trumpets sound
As when my Emperor overthrew the Greeks
And led them Captive into Africa.
Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves;
Prepare thyself to live and die my slave.
If Mahomet should come from heaven and swear
My royal Lord is slain or conquered,
Yet should he not persuade me otherwise
But that he lives and will be Conqueror.
Now, king of bassoes, who is Conqueror?
Thou, by the fortune of this damned foil.
Where are your stout contributory kings?
We have their crowns; their bodies strow the field.
Each man a crown? why, kingly fought, i' faith.
Deliver them into my treasury.
Now let me offer to my gracious lord
His royal Crown again, so highly won.
Nay, take the Turkish Crown from her, Zenocrate,
And crown me Emperor of Africa.
No, Tamburlaine; though now thou gat the best,
Thou shalt not yet be Lord of Africa.
Give her the Crown, Turkess, you were best.
Injurious villains, thieves, runagates,
How dare you thus abuse my Majesty?
Here, Madam, you are Empress; she is none.
Not now, Theridamas; her time is past.
The pillars that have bolstered up those terms
Are fall'n in clusters at my conquering feet.
Though he be prisoner, he may be ransomed.
Not all the world shall ransom Bajazeth.
Ah, fair Zabina, we have lost the field,
And never had the Turkish Emperor
So great a foil by any foreign foe.
Now will the Christian miscreants be glad,
Ringing with joy their superstitious bells,
And making bonfires for my overthrow.
But ere I die, those foul Idolaters
Shall make me bonfires with their filthy bones,
For though the glory of this day be lost,
Afric and Greece have garrisons enough
To make me Sovereign of the earth again.
Those walled garrisons will I subdue,
And write myself great Lord of Africa.
So from the East unto the furthest West
Shall Tamburlaine extend his puissant arm.
The Galleys and those pilling Brigandines,
That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf
And hover in the straits for Christians' wrack,
Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant,
Until the Persian Fleet and men of war,
sailing along the Oriental sea,
Have fetched about the Indian continent,
Even from Persepolis to Mexico,
And thence unto the straits of Gibraltar,
Where they shall meet and join their force in one,
Keeping in awe the Bay of Portingale
And all the Ocean by the British shore;
And by this means I'll win the world at last.
Yet set a ransom on me, Tamburlaine.
What, think'st thou Tamburlaine esteems thy gold?
I'll make the kings of India, ere I die,
Offer their mines to sue for peace to me.
And dig for treasure to appease my wrath.
Come, bind them both, and one lead in the Turk;
The Turkess let my Love's maid lead away.
Ah, villains, dare you touch my sacred arms?
O Mahomet! O sleepy Mahomet!
O cursed Mahomet, that mak'st us thus
The slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous!
Come, bring them in, and for this happy conquest
Triumph, and solemnize a martial feast.
Awake, ye men of Memphis! hear the clang
Of Scythian trumpets! hear the Basilisks,
That roaring shake Damascus' turrets down!
The rogue of Volga holds Zenocrate,
The Soldan's daughter, for his Concubine,
And with a troop of thieves and vagabonds,
Hath spread his colors to our high disgrace,
While you, faint-hearted base Egyptians,
Lie slumbering on the flowery banks of Nile,
As Crocodiles that unaffrighted rest
While thundering Cannons rattle on their Skins.
Nay, mighty Soldan, did your greatness see
The frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine,
That with his terror and imperious eyes
Commands the hearts of his associates,
It might amaze your royal majesty.
Villain, I tell thee, were that Tamburlaine
As monstrous as Gorgon, prince of Hell,
The Soldan would not start a foot from him.
But speak, what power hath he?  Mighty Lord,
Three hundred thousand men in armor clad,
Upon their prancing Steeds, disdainfully
With wanton paces trampling on the ground;
Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot,
Shaking their swords, their spears, and iron bills,
Environing their Standard round, that stood
As bristle-pointed as a thorny wood;
Their warlike Engines and munition
Exceed the forces of their martial men.
Nay, could their numbers countervail the stars,
Or ever drizzling drops of April showers,
Or withered leaves that Autumn shaketh down,
Yet would the Soldan by his conquering power
So scatter and consume them in his rage,
That not a man should live to rue their fall.
So might your highness, had you time to sort
Your fighting men, and raise your royal host,
But Tamburlaine by expedition
Advantage takes of your unreadiness.
Let him take all th' advantages he can.
Were all the world conspired to fight for him,
Nay, were he Devil, as he is no man,
Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate,
Whom he detaineth in despite of us,
This arm should send him down to Erebus,
To shroud his shame in darkness of the night.
Pleaseth your mightiness to understand,
His resolution far exceedeth all.
The first day when he pitcheth down his tents,
White is their hue, and on his silver crest,
A snowy Feather spangled white he bears,
To signify the mildness of his mind
That, satiate with spoil, refuseth blood;
But when Aurora mounts the second time,
As red as scarlet is his furniture;
Then must his kindled wrath be quenched with blood,
Not sparing any that can manage arms;
But if these threats move not submission,
Black are his colors, black Pavilion;
His spear, his shield, his horse, his armor, plumes,
And Jetty Feathers menace death and hell;
Without respect of Sex, degree, or age,
He razeth all his foes with fire and sword.
Merciless villain, Peasant ignorant
Of lawful arms or martial discipline!
Pillage and murder are his usual trades.
The slave usurps the glorious name of war.
See Capolin, the fair Arabian king,
That hath been disappointed by this slave
Of my fair daughter and his princely Love,
May have fresh warning to go war with us,
And be revenged for her disparagement.
Ye holy Priests of heavenly Mahomet,
That, sacrificing, slice and cut your flesh,
Staining his Altars with your purple blood,
Make heaven to frown and every fixed star
To suck up poison from the Moorish fens,
And pour it in this glorious Tyrant's throat!
The chiefest God, first mover of that Sphere
Enchased with thousands ever-shining lamps,
Will sooner burn the glorious frame of Heaven
Than it should so conspire my overthrow.
But, Villain, thou that wishest this to me,
Fall prostrate on the low disdainful earth,
And be the footstool of great Tamburlaine,
That I may rise into my royal throne.
First shalt thou rip my bowels with thy sword
And sacrifice my heart to death and hell,
Before I yield to such a slavery.
Base villain, vassal, slave to Tamburlaine,
Unworthy to embrace or touch the ground
That bears the honor of my royal weight,
Stoop, villain, stoop! stoop, for so he bids
That may command thee piecemeal to be torn,
Or scattered like the lofty Cedar trees
Strook with the voice of thundering Jupiter.
Then, as I look down to the damned Fiends,
Fiends, look on me; and thou, dread God of hell,
With Ebon Sceptre strike this hateful earth,
And make it swallow both of us at once!
Now clear the triple region of the air,
And let the majesty of heaven behold
Their Scourge and Terror tread on Emperors.
Smile Stars that reigned at my nativity,
And dim the brightness of their neighbor Lamps;
Disdain to borrow light of Cynthia,
For I, the chiefest Lamp of all the earth,
First rising in the East with mild aspect,
But fixed now in the Meridian line,
Will send up fire to your turning Spheres
And cause the Sun to borrow light of you.
My sword struck fire from his coat of steel,
Even in Bithynia, when I took this Turk,
As when a fiery exhalation,
Wrapped in the bowels of a freezing cloud,
Fighting for passage, makes the Welkin crack
And casts a flash of lightning to the earth.
But ere I march to wealthy Persia,
Or leave Damascus and th' Egyptian fields,
As was the fame of Clymene's brainsick son
That almost brent the Axletree of heaven,
So shall our swords, our lances, and our shot
Fill all the air with fiery meteors.
Then, when the Sky shall wax as red as blood,
It shall be said I made it red myself,
To make me think of nought but blood and war.
Unworthy king, that by thy cruelty
Unlawfully usurp'st the Persian seat,
Dar'st thou, that never saw an Emperor
Before thou met my husband in the field,
Being thy Captive, thus abuse his state,
Keeping his kingly body in a Cage,
That roofs of gold and sun-bright Palaces
Should have prepared to entertain his Grace?
And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet,
Whose feet the kings of Africa have kissed?
You must devise some torment worse, my Lord
To make these captives rein their lavish tongues.
Zenocrate, look better to your slave.
She is my Handmaid's slave, and she shall look
That these abuses flow not from her tongue.
Let these be warnings for you then, my slave,
How you abuse the person of the king;
Or else I swear to have you whipped stark naked.
Great Tamburlaine, great in my overthrow,
Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low,
For treading on the back of Bajazeth,
That should be horsed on four mighty kings.
Thy names and titles and thy dignities
Are fled from Bajazeth and remain with me,
That will maintain it against a world of kings.
Is this a place for mighty Bajazeth?
Confusion light on him that helps thee thus.
There, while he lives, shall Bajazeth be kept,
And where I go be thus in triumph drawn;
And thou, his wife, shall feed him with the scraps
My servitors shall bring thee from my board,
For he that gives him other food than this
Shall sit by him and starve to death himself.
This is my mind, and I will have it so.
Not all the Kings and Emperors of the Earth,
If they would lay their crowns before my feet,
Shall ransom him or take him from his cage.
The ages that shall talk of Tamburlaine,
Even from this day to Plato's wondrous year,
Shall talk how I have handled Bajazeth.
These Moors, that drew him from Bithynia
To fair Damascus, where we now remain,
Shall lead him with us wheresoe'er we go.
Techelles, and my loving followers,
Now may we see Damascus' lofty towers,
Like to the shadows of Pyramides
That with their beauties grace the Memphian fields.
The golden stature of their feathered bird,
That spreads her wings upon the city walls,
Shall not defend it from our battering shot.
The townsmen mask in silk and cloth of gold,
And every house is as a treasury;
The men, the treasure, and the town are ours.
Your tents of white now pitched before the gates,
And gentle flags of amity displayed,
I doubt not but the Governor will yield,
Offering Damascus to your Majesty.
So shall he have his life, and all the rest.
But if he stay until the bloody flag
Be once advanced on my vermilion Tent,
He dies, and those that kept us out so long.
And when they see me march in black array,
With mournful streamers hanging down their heads,
Were in that city all the world contained,
Not one should 'scape, but perish by our swords.
Yet would you have some pity for my sake,
Because it is my country's and my Father's.
Not for the world, Zenocrate, if I have sworn.
Methinks we march as Meleager did,
Environed with brave Argolian knights,
To chase the savage Calydonian Boar,
Or Cephalus, with lusty Theban youths,
Against the Wolf that angry Themis sent
To waste and spoil the sweet Aonian fields.
A monster of five hundred thousand heads,
Compact of Rapine, Piracy, and spoil,
The Scum of men, the hate and Scourge of God,
Raves in Egyptia, and annoyeth us.
My Lord, it is the bloody Tamburlaine,
A sturdy Felon, and a base-bred Thief,
By murder raised to the Persian Crown,
That dares control us in our Territories.
To tame the pride of this presumptuous beast,
Join your Arabians with the Soldan's power;
Let us unite our royal bands in one
And hasten to remove Damascus' siege.
It is a blemish to the Majesty
And high estate of mighty Emperors,
That such a base usurping vagabond
Should brave a king, or wear a princely crown.
Renowned Soldan, have ye lately heard
The overthrow of mighty Bajazeth
About the confines of Bithynia?
The slavery wherewith he persecutes
The noble Turk and his great Empress?
I have, and sorrow for his bad success.
But, noble Lord of great Arabia,
Be so persuaded that the Soldan is
No more dismayed with tidings of his fall,
Than in the haven when the Pilot stands,
And views a stranger's ship rent in the winds
And shivered against a craggy rock.
Yet in compassion to his wretched state,
A sacred vow to heaven and him I make,
Confirming it with Ibis' holy name,
That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the hour,
Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong
Unto the hallowed person of a prince,
Or kept the fair Zenocrate so long,
As Concubine, I fear, to feed his lust.
Let grief and fury hasten on revenge.
Let Tamburlaine for his offenses feel
Such plagues as heaven and we can pour on him.
I long to break my spear upon his crest
And prove the weight of his victorious arm;
For Fame, I fear, hath been too prodigal
In sounding through the world his partial praise.
Capolin, hast thou surveyed our powers?
Great Emperors of Egypt and Arabia,
The number of your hosts united is
A hundred and fifty thousand horse,
Two hundred thousand foot, brave men-at-arms,
Courageous and full of hardiness,
As frolic as the hunters in the chase
Of savage beasts amid the desert woods.
My mind presageth fortunate success,
And, Tamburlaine, my spirit doth foresee
The utter ruin of thy men and thee.
Then rear your standards; let your sounding Drums
Direct our Soldiers to Damascus' walls.
Now, Tamburlaine, the mighty Soldan comes
And leads with him the great Arabian King
To dim thy baseness and obscurity,
Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil;
To raze and scatter thy inglorious crew
Of Scythians and slavish Persians. 
Now hang our bloody colors by Damascus,
Reflexing hues of blood upon their heads,
While they walk quivering on their city walls,
Half dead for fear before they feel my wrath.
Then let us freely banquet and carouse
Full bowls of wine unto the God of war,
That means to fill your helmets full of gold,
And make Damascus' spoils as rich to you
As was to Jason Colcho's golden fleece.
And now, Bajazeth, hast thou any stomach?
Ay, such a stomach, (cruel Tamburlaine), as I could
willingly feed upon thy blood raw heart.
Nay, thine own is easier to come by.  Pluck out that,
And 'twill serve thee and thy wife.  Well, Zenocrate,
Techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals.
Fall to, and never may your meat digest!
Ye Furies, that can mask invisible,
Dive to the bottom of Avernus' pool,
And in your hands bring hellish poison up,
And squeeze it in the cup of Tamburlaine!
Or, winged snakes of Lerna, cast your stings,
And leave your venoms in this Tyrant's dish!
And may this banquet prove as ominous
As Progne's to th' adulterous Thracian King
That fed upon the substance of his child.
My Lord, how can you suffer these
Outrageous curses by these slaves of yours?
To let them see, (divine Zenocrate),
I glory in the curses of my foes,
Having the power from the Empyreal heaven
To turn them all upon their proper heads.
My lord, to see my father's town besieged,
The country wasted, where myself was born,
How can it but afflict my very soul?
If any love remain in you, my Lord,
Or if my love unto your majesty
May merit favor at your highness' hands,
Then raise your siege from fair Damascus' walls,
And with my father take a friendly truce.
Zenocrate, were Egypt Jove's own land,
Yet would I with my sword make Jove to stoop.
I will confute those blind Geographers
That make a triple region in the world,
Excluding Regions which I mean to trace,
And with this pen reduce them to a Map,
Calling the Provinces, Cities, and towns,
After my name and thine, Zenocrate.
Here at Damascus will I make the Point
That shall begin the Perpendicular.
And wouldst thou have me buy thy Father's love
With such a loss? Tell me, Zenocrate.
Honor still wait on happy Tamburlaine;
Yet give me leave to plead for him, my Lord.
Content thyself: his person shall be safe,
And all the friends of fair Zenocrate,
If with their lives they will be pleased to yield,
Or may be forced to make me Emperor;
For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.
My empty stomach, full of idle heat,
Draws bloody humors from my feeble parts,
Preserving life by hasting cruel death.
My veins are pale, my sinews hard and dry,
My joints benumbed; unless I eat, I die.
Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them.
Kings of Argier, Morocco, and of Fez,
You that have marched with happy Tamburlaine
As far as from the frozen place of heaven
Unto the wat'ry morning's ruddy bower,
And thence by land unto the Torrid Zone,
Deserve these titles I endow you with
By valor and by magnanimity.
Your births shall be no blemish to your fame,
For virtue is the fount whence honor springs,
And they are worthy she investeth kings.
And, since your highness hath so well vouchsafed,
If we deserve them not with higher meeds
Than erst our states and actions have retained,
Take them away again, and make us slaves.
Well said, Theridamas. when holy fates
Shall 'stablish me in strong Egyptia,
We mean to travel to th' Antarctic Pole,
Conquering the people underneath our feet,
And be renowned as never Emperors were.
Zenocrate, I will not crown thee yet,
Until with greater honors I be graced.
Still doth this man, or rather God of war,
Batter our walls and beat our Turrets down;
And to resist with longer stubbornness
Or hope of rescue from the Soldan's power,
Were but to bring our willful overthrow,
And make us desperate of our threatened lives.
We see his tents have now been altered
With terrors to the last and cruell'st hue.
His coal-black colors, everywhere advanced,
Threaten our city with a general spoil;
And if we should with common rites of Arms
Offer our safeties to his clemency,
I fear the custom proper to his sword.
Which he observes as parcel of his fame,
Intending so to terrify the world,
By any innovation or remorse
Will never be dispensed with till our deaths.
Therefore, for these our harmless virgins' sakes,
Whose honors and whose lives rely on him,
Let us have hope that their unspotted prayers,
Their blubbered cheeks, and hearty humble moans
Will melt his fury into some remorse,
And use us like a loving Conqueror.
If humble suits or imprecations
(Uttered with tears of wretchedness and blood
Shed from the heads and hearts of all our Sex,
Some made your wives, and some your children,)
Might have entreated your obdurate breasts
To entertain some care of our securities
While only danger beat upon our walls,
These more than dangerous warrants of our death
Had never been erected as they be,
Nor you depend on such weak helps as we.
Well, lovely Virgins, think our country's care,
Our love of honor, loath to be enthralled
To foreign powers and rough imperious yokes,
Would not with too much cowardice or fear,
Before all hope of rescue were denied,
Submit yourselves and us to servitude.
Therefore, in that your safeties and our own,
Your honors, liberties, and lives were weighed
In equal care and balance with our own,
Endure as we the malice of our stars,
The wrath of Tamburlaine and power of wars,
Or be the means the overweighing heavens
Have kept to qualify these hot extremes,
And bring us pardon in your cheerful looks.
Then here, before the majesty of heaven
And holy Patrons of Egyptia,
With knees and hearts submissive we entreat
Grace to our words and pity to our looks
That this device may prove propitious,
And through the eyes and ears of Tamburlaine
Convey events of mercy to his heart.
Grant that these signs of victory we yield
May bind the temples of his conquering head
To hide the folded furrows of his brows,
And shadow his displeased countenance
With happy looks of ruth and lenity.
Leave us, my Lord, and loving countrymen.
What simple Virgins may persuade, we will.
Farewell, sweet Virgins, on whose safe return
Depends our city, liberty, and lives. 
What, are the Turtles frayed out of their nests?
Alas, poor fools, must you be first shall feel
The sworn destruction of Damascus?
They know my custom; could they not as well
Have sent ye out when first my milk-white flags,
Through which sweet mercy threw her gentle beams,
Reflexing them on your disdainful eyes,
As now when fury and incensed hate
Flings slaughtering terror from my coal-black tents,
And tells for truth submission comes too late?
Most happy King and Emperor of the earth,
Image of Honor and Nobility,
For whom the Powers divine have made the world
And on whose throne the holy Graces sit,
In whose sweet person is comprised the Sum
Of nature's Skill and heavenly majesty,
Pity our plights! O, pity poor Damascus!
Pity old age, within whose silver hairs
Honor and reverence evermore have reigned.
Pity the marriage bed, where many a Lord,
In prime and glory of his loving joy,
Embraceth now with tears of ruth and blood
The jealous body of his fearful wife,
Whose cheeks and hearts, so punished with conceit
To think thy puissant never-stayed arm
Will part their bodies and prevent their souls
From heavens of comfort yet their age might bear,
Now wax all pale and withered to the death,
As well for grief our ruthless Governor
Hath thus refused the mercy of thy hand,
(whose sceptre Angels kiss and Furies dread,)
As for their liberties, their loves, or lives.
O, then, for these, and such as we ourselves,
For us, for infants, and for all our bloods,
That never nourished thought against thy rule,
Pity, O pity, (sacred Emperor,)
The prostrate service of this wretched town;
And take in sign thereof this gilded wreath,
Whereto each man of rule hath given his hand,
And wished, as worthy subjects, happy means
To be investers of thy royal brows
Even with the true Egyptian Diadem.
Virgins, in vain you labor to prevent
That which mine honor swears shall be performed.
Behold my sword; what see you at the point?
Nothing but fear and fatal steel, my Lord.
Your fearful minds are thick and misty then,
For there sits Death; there sits imperious Death,
Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.
But I am pleased you shall not see him there.
He now is seated on my horsemen's spears,
And on their points his fleshless body feeds.
Techelles, straight go charge a few of them
To charge these Dames and show my servant, death,
Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears.
Away with them, I say, and show them death.
I will not spare these proud Egyptians,
Nor change my Martial observations
For all the wealth of Gihon's golden waves.
Or for the love of Venus, would she leave
The angry God of Arms and lie with me.
They have refused the offer of their lives
And know my customs are as peremptory
As wrathful Planets, death, or destiny.
What, have your horsemen shown the virgins Death?
They have, my Lord, and on Damascus' walls
Have hoisted up their slaughtered carcasses.
A sight as baneful to their souls, I think,
As are Thessalian drugs or Mithridate:
But go, my Lords, put the rest to the sword.
Ah, fair Zenocrate! divine Zenocrate!
Fair is too foul an Epithet for thee,
That in thy passion for thy country's love,
And fear to see thy kingly Father's harm,
With hair dishevelled wip'st thy watery cheeks;
And, like to Flora in her morning's pride,
Shaking her silver tresses in the air,
Rain'st on the earth resolved pearl in showers,
And sprinklest Sapphires on thy shining face,
Where Beauty, mother to the Muses, sits,
And comments volumes with her Ivory pen,
Taking instructions from thy flowing eyes,
Eyes, when that Ebena steps to heaven,
In silence of thy solemn Evening's walk,
Making the mantle of the richest night,
The Moon, the Planets, and the Meteors, light.
There Angels in their crystal armors fight
A doubtful battle with my tempted thoughts
For Egypt's freedom and the Soldan's life,
His life that so consumes Zenocrate,
Whose sorrows lay more siege unto my soul
Than all my Army to Damascus' walls;
And neither Persia's Sovereign nor the Turk
Troubled my senses with conceit of foil
So much by much as doth Zenocrate.
What is beauty, saith my sufferings, then?
If all the pens that ever poets held
Had fed the feeling of their masters' thoughts,
And every sweetness that inspired their hearts,
Their minds, and muses on admired themes;
If all the heavenly Quintessence they still
From their immortal flowers of Poesy,
Wherein, as in a mirror, we perceive
The highest reaches of a human wit;
If these had made one Poem's period,
And all combined in Beauty's worthiness,
Yet should there hover in their restless heads
One thought, one grace, one wonder, at the least,
Which into words no virtue can digest.
But how unseemly is it for my Sex,
My discipline of arms and Chivalry,
My nature, and the terror of my name,
To harbor thoughts effeminate and faint!
Save only that in Beauty's just applause,
With whose instinct the soul of man is touched;
And every warrior that is rapt with love
Of fame, of valor, and of victory,
Must needs have beauty beat on his conceits.
I thus conceiving and subduing both,
That which hath stopped the tempest of the Gods,
Even from the fiery spangled veil of heaven,
To feel the lovely warmth of shepherds' flames
And march in cottages of strowed weeds,
Shall give the world to note, for all my birth,
That Virtue solely is the sum of glory,
And fashions men with true nobility.
The town is ours, my Lord, and fresh supply
Of conquest and of spoil is offered us.
That's well, Techelles. what's the news?
The Soldan and the Arabian king together
March on us with such eager violence
As if there were no way but one with us.
No more there is not, I warrant thee, Techelles.
We know the victory is ours, my Lord,
But let us save the reverend Soldan's life
For fair Zenocrate that so laments his state.
That will we chiefly see unto, Theridamas,
For sweet Zenocrate, whose worthiness
Deserves a conquest over every heart.
And now, my footstool, if I lose the field,
You hope of liberty and restitution.
Here let him stay, my masters, from the tents,
Till we have made us ready for the field.
Pray for us, Bajazeth; we are going. 
Go, never return with victory!
Millions of men encompass thee about,
And gore thy body with as many wounds!
Sharp forked arrows light upon thy horse!
Furies from the black Cocytus lake,
Break up the earth, and with their firebrands
Enforce thee run upon the baneful pikes!
Volleys of shot pierce through thy charmed Skin,
And every bullet dipped in poisoned drugs!
Or roaring Cannons sever all thy joints,
Making thee mount as high as Eagles soar!
Let all the swords and Lances in the field
Stick in his breast as in their proper rooms!
At every pore let blood come dropping forth,
That lingering pains may massacre his heart
And madness send his damned soul to hell!
Ah, fair Zabina! we may curse his power,
The heavens may frown, the earth for anger quake,
But such a Star hath influence in his sword
As rules the Skies and countermands the Gods
More than Cimmerian Styx or Destiny.
And then shall we in this detested guise,
With shame, with hunger, and with horror  --  ay,
Griping our bowels with retorqued thoughts
And have no hope to end our ecstasies.
Then is there left no Mahomet, no God,
No Fiend, no Fortune, nor no hope of end
To our infamous, monstrous slaveries?
Gape earth, and let the Fiends infernal view
A hell as hopeless and as full of fear
As are the blasted banks of Erebus,
Where shaking ghosts with ever howling groans
Hover about the ugly Ferryman
To get a passage to Elysium!
Why should we live? O, wretches, beggars, slaves!
Why live we, Bajazeth, and build up nests
So high within the region of the air,
By living long in this oppression,
That all the world will see and laugh to scorn
The former triumphs of our mightiness
In this obscure infernal servitude?
O life, more loathsome to my vexed thoughts
Than noisome parbreak of the Stygian Snakes,
Which fills the nooks of Hell with standing air,
Infecting all the Ghosts with cureless griefs!
O dreary Engines of my loathed sight,
That see my crown, my honor, and my name
Thrust under yoke and thralldom of a thief,
Why feed ye still on day's accursed beams,
And sink not quite into my tortured soul?
You see my wife, my Queen, and Empress,
Brought up and propped by the hand of fame,
Queen of fifteen contributory Queens,
Now thrown to rooms of black abjection,
Smeared with blots of basest drudgery,
And Villainess to shame, disdain, and misery.
Accursed Bajazeth, whose words of ruth,
That would with pity cheer Zabina's heart,
And make our souls resolve in ceaseless tears,
Sharp hunger bites upon and gripes the root
From whence the issue of my thoughts do break.
O poor Zabina! O my Queen, my Queen!
Fetch me some water for my burning breast,
To cool and comfort me with longer date,
That in the shortened sequel of my life
I may pour forth my soul into thine arms
With words of love whose moaning intercourse
Hath hitherto been stayed with wrath and hate
Of our expressless banned inflictions.
Sweet Bajazeth, I will prolong thy life
As long as any blood or spark of breath
Can quench or cool the torments of my grief.
Now, Bajazeth, abridge thy baneful days,
And beat the brains out of thy conquered head,
Since other means are all forbidden me,
That may be ministers of my decay.
O highest Lamp of ever-living Jove,
Accursed day, infected with my griefs,
Hide now thy stained face in endless night,
And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens.
Let ugly darkness with her rusty coach
Engirt with tempests, wrapped in pitchy clouds,
Smother the earth with never fading mists,
And let her horses from their nostrils breathe
Rebellious winds and dreadful thunderclaps,
That in this terror Tamburlaine may live,
And my pined soul, resolved in liquid air,
May still excruciate his tormented thoughts!
Then let the stony dart of senseless cold
Pierce through the center of my withered heart,
And make a passage for my loathed life!
What do mine eyes behold? my husband dead!
His Skull all riven in twain, his brains dashed out!
The brains of Bajazeth, my Lord and Sovereign!
O Bajazeth, my husband and my Lord!
O Bajazeth! O Turk! O Emperor!
Give him his liquor? Not I. bring milk and fire, and
my blood I bring him again. tear me in pieces. give
me the sword with a ball of wild fire upon it. Down
with him! down with him! Go to, my child.
Away, away, away! Ah, save that Infant! save him,
save him! I, even I, speak to her. the Sun was down
Streamers white, Red, Black. here, here, here! Fling
the meat in his face! Tamburlaine, Tamburlaine!
Let the soldiers be buried. Hell, death, Tamburlaine,
Hell! make ready my Coach, my chair, my jewels.
I come, I come, I come!
Wretched Zenocrate, that livest to see
Damascus' walls dyed with Egyptian blood,
Thy Father's subjects and thy countrymen;
The streets strowed with dissevered joints of men,
And wounded bodies gasping yet for life;
But most accursed, to see the Sun-bright troop
Of heavenly virgins and unspotted maids,
(Whose looks might make the angry God of arms
To break his sword and mildly treat of love)
On horsemen's Lances to be hoisted up,
And guiltlessly endure a cruel death.
For every fell and stout Tartarian Steed,
That stamped on others with their thundering hooves,
When all their riders charged their quivering spears,
Began to check the ground and rein themselves,
Gazing upon the beauty of their looks.
Ah, Tamburlaine, wert thou the cause of this,
That term'st Zenocrate thy dearest love?
Whose lives were dearer to Zenocrate
Than her own life, or aught save thine own love?
But see, another bloody spectacle!
Ah, wretched eyes, the enemies of my heart,
How are ye glutted with these grievous objects,
And tell my soul more tales of bleeding ruth!
See, see, Anippe, if they breathe or no.
No breath, nor sense, nor motion, in them both.
Ah, Madam, this their slavery hath Enforced,
And ruthless cruelty of Tamburlaine!
Earth, cast up fountains from thy entrails,
And wet thy cheeks for their untimely deaths.
Shake with their weight in sign of fear and grief.
Blush, heaven, that gave them honor at their birth
And let them die a death so barbarous.
Those that are proud of fickle Empery
And place their chiefest good in earthly pomp,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress!
Ah, Tamburlaine my love, sweet Tamburlaine,
That fights for Sceptres and for slippery crowns,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress!
Thou, that in conduct of thy happy stars,
Sleep'st every night with conquest on thy brows,
And yet wouldst shun the wavering turns of war,
In fear and feeling of the like distress,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress!
Ah, mighty Jove and holy Mahomet,
Pardon my Love! o, pardon his contempt
Of earthly fortune and respect of pity,
And let not conquest, ruthlessly pursued,
Be equally against his life incensed
In this great Turk and hapless Empress!
And pardon me that was not moved with ruth
To see them live so long in misery!
Ah, what may chance to thee, Zenocrate?
Madam, content yourself, and be resolved,
Your Love hath fortune so at his command,
That she shall stay, and turn her wheel no more,
As long as life maintains his mighty arm
That fights for honor to adorn your head.
What other heavy news now brings Philemus?
Madam, your father, and th' Arabian king,
The first affecter of your excellence,
Come now, as Turnus 'gainst Aeneas did,
Armed with lance into the Egyptian fields,
Ready for battle 'gainst my Lord the King.
Now shame and duty, love and fear present
A thousand sorrows to my martyred soul.
Whom should I wish the fatal victory,
When my poor pleasures are divided thus,
And racked by duty from my cursed heart?
My father and my first-betrothed love
Must fight against my life and present love,
Wherein the change I use condemns my faith
And makes my deeds infamous through the world.
But as the Gods, to end the Trojans' toil,
Prevented Turnus of Lavinia
And fatally enriched Aeneas' love,
So, for a final Issue to my griefs,
To pacify my country and my love,
Must Tamburlaine by their resistless powers,
With virtue of a gentle victory,
Conclude a league of honor to my hope;
Then, as the powers divine have preordained,
With happy safety of my father's life
Send like defense of fair Arabia.
What cursed power guides the murdering hands
Of this infamous Tyrant's soldiers,
That no escape may save their enemies,
Nor fortune keep themselves from victory?
Lie down, Arabia, wounded to the death,
And let Zenocrate's fair eyes behold
That, as for her thou bear'st these wretched arms,
Even so for her thou diest in these arms,
Leaving thy blood for witness of thy love.
Too dear a witness for such love, my Lord.
Behold Zenocrate, the cursed object
Whose fortunes never mastered her griefs.
Behold her wounded in conceit for thee,
As much as thy fair body is for me!
Then shall I die with full contented heart,
Having beheld divine Zenocrate,
Whose sight with joy would take away my life,
As now it bringeth sweetness to my wound,
If I had not been wounded as I am.
Ah, that the deadly pangs I suffer now
Would lend an hour's license to my tongue,
To make discourse of some sweet accidents
Have chanced thy merits in this worthless bondage,
And that I might be privy to the state
Of thy deserved contentment and thy love.
But, making now a virtue of thy sight,
To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul,
Since Death denies me further cause of joy,
Deprived of care, my heart with comfort dies,
Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes.
Come, happy Father of Zenocrate,
A title higher than thy Soldan's name.
Though my right hand have thus enthralled thee,
Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free,
She that hath calmed the fury of my sword,
Which had ere this been bathed in streams of blood
As vast and deep as Euphrates or Nile.
O sight thrice welcome to my joyful soul,
To see the king, my Father, issue safe
From dangerous battle of my conquering love!
Well met, my only dear Zenocrate,
Though with the loss of Egypt and my Crown.
'Twas I, my lord, that gat the victory,
And therefore grieve not at your overthrow,
Since I shall render all into your hands,
And add more strength to your dominions
Than ever yet confirmed th' Egyptian Crown.
The God of war resigns his room to me,
Meaning to make me General of the world.
Jove, viewing me in arms, looks pale and wan,
Fearing my power should pull him from his throne.
Where'er I come the fatal sisters sweat,
And grisly death, by running to-and-fro
To do their ceaseless homage to my sword.
And here in Afric, where it seldom rains,
Since I arrived with my triumphant host,
Have swelling clouds, drawn from wide gasping wounds,
Been oft resolved in bloody purple showers,
A meteor that might terrify the earth,
And make it quake at every drop it drinks.
Millions of souls sit on the banks of Styx,
Waiting the back return of Charon's boat;
Hell and Elysium swarm with ghosts of men
That I have sent from sundry foughten fields
To spread my fame through hell and up to heaven.
And see, my Lord, a sight of strange import,
Emperors and kings lie breathless at my feet.
The Turk and his great Empress, as it seems,
Left to themselves while we were at the fight,
Have desperately dispatched their slavish lives:
With them Arabia, too, hath left his life;
All sights of power to grace my victory.
And such are objects fit for Tamburlaine,
Wherein, as in a mirror, may be seen
His honor, that consists in shedding blood
When men presume to manage arms with him.
Mighty hath God and Mahomet made thy hand,
(Renowned Tamburlaine), to whom all kings
Of force must yield their crowns and Emperies;
And I am pleased with this my overthrow,
If, as beseems a person of thy state,
Thou hast with honor used Zenocrate.
Her state and person want no pomp, you see,
And for all blot of foul inchastity,
I record heaven, her heavenly self is clear.
Then let me find no further time to grace
Her princely Temples with the Persian crown;
But here these kings that on my fortunes wait,
And have been crowned for proved worthiness
Even by this hand that shall establish them,
Shall now, adjoining all their hands with mine,
Invest her here the Queen of Persia.
What saith the noble Soldan and Zenocrate?
I yield with thanks and protestations
Of endless honor to thee for her love.
Then doubt I not but fair Zenocrate
Will soon consent to satisfy us both.
Else should I much forget myself, my Lord.
Then let us set the crown upon her head,
That long hath lingered for so high a seat.
My hand is ready to perform the deed,
For now her marriage time shall work us rest.
And here's the crown, my Lord; help set it on.
Then sit thou down, divine Zenocrate,
And here we crown thee Queen of Persia,
And all the kingdoms and dominions
That late the power of Tamburlaine subdued.
As Juno, when the Giants were suppressed,
That darted mountains at her brother Jove,
So looks my Love, shadowing in her brows
Triumphs and Trophies for my victories;
Or as Latona's daughter, bent to arms,
Adding more courage to my conquering mind.
To gratify thee, sweet Zenocrate,
Egyptians, Moors, and men of Asia,
From Barbary unto the Western Indie,
Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy Sire;
And from the bounds of Afric to the banks
Of Ganges shall his mighty arm extend.
And now, my Lords and loving followers,
That purchased kingdoms by your martial deeds,
Cast off your armor, put on scarlet robes,
Mount up your royal places of estate,
Environed with troops of noblemen,
And there make laws to rule your provinces.
Hang up your weapons on Alcides' post,
For Tamburlaine takes truce with all the world.
Thy first-betrothed Love, Arabia,
Shall we with honor, as beseems, entomb
With this great Turk and his fair Empress.
Then, after all these solemn Exequies,
We will our rites of marriage solemnize.
<TAM2VS>
The general welcomes Tamburlaine received,
When he arrived last upon our stage,
Hath made our Poet pen his second part,
Where death cuts off the progress of his pomp
And murderous Fates throw all his triumphs down.
But what became of fair Zenocrate,
And with how many cities' sacrifice
He celebrated her sad funeral,
Himself in presence shall unfold at large.
Egregious Viceroys of these Eastern parts,
Placed by the issue of great Bajazeth,
And sacred lord, the mighty Callapine,
Who lives in Egypt prisoner to that slave
Which kept his father in an iron cage,
Now have we marched from fair Natolia
Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius' banks
Our warlike host in complete armor rest,
Where Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
Should meet our person to conclude a truce.
What! Shall we parle with the Christian,
Or cross the stream and meet him in the field?
King of Natolia, let us treat of peace.
We are all glutted with the Christians' blood,
And have a greater foe to fight against,
Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
Near Guyron's head, doth set his conquering feet
And means to fire Turkey as he goes.
'Gainst him, my Lord, you must address your power.
Besides, king Sigismund hath brought from Christendom
More than his Camp of stout Hungarians -
Slavonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes,
That with the Halberd, Lance, and murdering Axe,
Will hazard that we might with surety hold.
Though from the shortest Northern Parallel,
Vast Gruntland, compassed with the frozen sea,
Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
Giants as big as hugy Polypheme,
Millions of Soldiers cut the Arctic line,
Bringing the strength of Europe to these Arms,
Our Turkey blades shall glide through all their throats,
And make this champion mead a bloody Fen.
Danubius' stream, that runs to Trebizon,
Shall carry, wrapped within his scarlet waves,
As martial presents to our friends at home,
The slaughtered bodies of these Christians.
The Terrene main, wherein Danubius' falls,
Shall by this battle be the bloody Sea.
The wandering Sailors of proud Italy
Shall meet those Christians, fleeting with the tide,
Beating in heaps against their Argosies,
And make fair Europe, mounted on her bull,
Trapped with the wealth and riches of the world,
Alight and wear a woeful mourning weed.
Yet, stout Orcanes, Prorex of the world,
Since Tamburlaine hath mustered all his men,
Marching from Cairo northward with his camp,
To Alexandria and the frontier towns,
Meaning to make a conquest of our land,
'Tis requisite to parle for a peace
With Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
And save our forces for the hot assaults
Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.
Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said.
My realm, the Center of our Empery,
Once lost, All Turkey would be overthrown;
And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
Slavonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes,
Fear not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine,
Nor he, but Fortune that hath made him great.
We have revolted Grecians, Albanese,
Sicilians, Jews, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
Natolians, Sorians, black Egyptians,
Illyrians, Thracians, and Bithynians,
Enough to swallow forceless Sigismund,
Yet scarce enough t' encounter Tamburlaine.
He brings a world of people to the field:
From Scythia to the Oriental Plage
Of India, where raging Lantchidol
Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
That never seaman yet discovered.
All Asia is in Arms with Tamburlaine.
Even from the midst of fiery Cancer's Tropic
To Amazonia under Capricorn,
And thence as far as Archipelago,
All Afric is in Arms with Tamburlaine;
Therefore, Viceroys, the Christians must have peace.
Orcanes, (as our Legates promised thee),
We, with our Peers, have crossed Danubius' stream
To treat of friendly peace or deadly war.
Take which thou wilt; for, as the Romans used,
I here present thee with a naked sword.
Wilt thou have war, then shake this blade at me;
If peace, restore it to my hands again,
And I will sheathe it to confirm the same.
Stay, Sigismund. forget'st thou I am he
That with the Cannon shook Vienna walls
And made it dance upon the Continent,
As when the massy substance of the earth
Quiver about the Axletree of heaven?
Forget'st thou that I sent a shower of darts,
Mingled with powdered shot and feathered steel,
So thick upon the blink-eyed Burghers' heads,
That thou thyself, then County Palatine,
The king of Boheme, and the Austric duke,
Sent Heralds out, which basely on their knees,
In all your names desired a truce of me?
Forget'st thou that to have me raise my siege,
Wagons of gold were set before my tent,
Stamped with the princely Fowl that in her wings
Carries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove?
How canst thou think of this and offer war?
Vienna was besieged, and I was there,
Then County Palatine but now a king,
And what we did was in extremity.
But now, Orcanes, view my royal host
That hides these plains and seems as vast and wide
As doth the Desert of Arabia
To those that stand on Bagdad's lofty Tower,
Or as the Ocean to the Traveler
That rests upon the snowy Apennines,
And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
Or treat of peace with the Natolian king.
Kings of Natolia and of Hungary,
We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
And not to dare each other to the field.
A friendly parle might become ye both.
And we from Europe, to the same intent,
Which if your General refuse or scorn,
Our Tents are pitched, our men stand in array,
Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.
So prest are we: but yet, if Sigismund
Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
Here is his sword; let peace be ratified
On these conditions specified before,
Drawn with advice of our Ambassadors.
Then here I sheathe it and give thee my hand,
Never to draw it out or manage arms
Against thyself or thy confederates,
But whilst I live will be at truce with thee.
But, Sigismund, confirm it with an oath,
And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.
By him that made the world and saved my soul,
The son of God and issue of a Maid,
Sweet Jesus Christ, I solemnly protest
And vow to keep this peace inviolable.
By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
Whose holy Alcoran remains with us,
Whose glorious body, when he left the world,
Closed in a coffin mounted up the air
And hung on stately Mecca's Temple roof,
I swear to keep this truce inviolable.
Of whose conditions and our solemn oaths,
Signed with our hands, each shall retain a scroll
As memorable witness of our league.
Now, Sigismund, if any Christian King
Encroach upon the confines of thy realm,
Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
Confirmed this league beyond Danubius' stream,
And they will, trembling, sound a quick retreat;
So am I feared among all Nations.
If any heathen potentate or king
Invade Natolia, Sigismund will send
A hundred thousand horse trained to the war,
And backed by stout Lancers of Germany,
The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.
I thank thee, Sigismund; but, when I war,
All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece
Follow my standard and my thundering drums.
Come, let us go and banquet in our tents.
I will dispatch chief of my army hence
To fair Natolia and to Trebizon,
To stay my coming 'gainst proud Tamburlaine.
Friend Sigismund and peers of Hungary,
Come, banquet and carouse with us a while,
And then depart we to our territories. 
Sweet Almeda, pity the ruthful plight
Of Callapine, the son of Bajazeth,
Born to be Monarch of the Western world,
Yet here detained by cruel Tamburlaine.
My Lord, I pity it, and with my heart
Wish your release; but he whose wrath is death,
My sovereign Lord, renowned Tamburlaine,
Forbids you further liberty than this.
Ah, were I now but half so eloquent
To paint in words what I'll perform in deeds,
I know thou wouldst depart from hence with me.
Not for all Afric; therefore move me not.
Yet hear me speak, my gentle Almeda.
No speech to that end, by your favor, sir.
No talk of running, I tell you, sir.
A little further, gentle Almeda.
By Cairo runs to Alexandria Bay
Darotes' stream, wherein at anchor lies
A Turkish Galley of my royal fleet,
Waiting my coming to the river side,
Hoping by some means I shall be released;
Which, when I come aboard, will hoist up sail
And soon put forth into the Terrene sea,
Where, 'twixt the isles of Cyprus and of Crete,
We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more,
Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
Amongst so many crowns of burnished gold,
Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command.
A thousand Galleys, manned with Christian slaves,
I freely give thee, which shall cut the straits,
And bring Armadoes from the coasts of Spain,
Fraughted with gold of rich America.
The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
Skillful in music and in amorous lays,
As fair as was Pygmalion's Ivory girl
Or lovely Io metamorphosed.
With naked Negroes shall thy coach be drawn,
And, as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
The pavement underneath thy chariot wheels
With Turkey Carpets shall be covered,
And cloth of Arras hung about the walls,
Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce.
A hundred Bassoes, clothed in crimson silk,
Shall ride before thee on Barbarian Steeds;
And, when thou goest, a golden Canopy
Enchased with precious stones, which shine as bright
As that fair veil that covers all the world,
When Phoebus, leaping from his Hemisphere,
Descendeth downward to th' Antipodes -
And more than this, for all I cannot tell.
How far hence lies the Galley, say you?
Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.
But need we not be spied going aboard?
Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill
And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
The sails wrapped up, the mast and tacklings down,
She lies so close that none can find her out.
I like that well. but tell me, my Lord, if I
should let you go, would you be as good as your word?
Shall I be made a king for my labor?
As I am Callapine the Emperor,
And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
Thou shalt be crowned a king, and be my mate.
Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
Your Keeper under Tamburlaine the great,
(For that's the style and title I have yet,)
Although he sent a thousand armed men
To intercept this haughty enterprise,
Yet would I venture to conduct your Grace
And die before I brought you back again!
Thanks, gentle Almeda. then let us haste,
Lest time be past and lingering let us both.
When you will, my Lord, I am ready.
Even straight: and farewell, cursed Tamburlaine.
Now go I to revenge my father's death. 
Now, bright Zenocrate, the world's fair eye,
Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heaven,
Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air
And clothe it in a crystal livery,
Now rest thee here on fair Larissa Plains,
Where Egypt and the Turkish Empire part,
Between thy sons that shall be Emperors,
And every one Commander of a world.
Sweet Tamburlaine, when wilt thou leave these arms
And save thy sacred person free from scathe
And dangerous chances of the wrathful war?
When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles,
And when the ground, whereon my soldiers march,
Shall rise aloft and touch the horned Moon,
And not before, my sweet Zenocrate.
Sit up, and rest thee like a lovely Queen.
So, now she sits in pomp and majesty,
When these, my sons, more precious in mine eyes
Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdued,
Placed by her side, look on their mother's face.
But yet methinks their looks are amorous,
Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine.
Water and air, being symbolized in one,
Argue their want of courage and of wit;
Their hair, as white as milk, and soft as Down,
(Which should be like the quills of Porcupines,
As black as Jet, and hard as Iron or Steel),
Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars;
Their fingers made to quaver on a Lute,
Their arms to hang about a Lady's neck,
Their legs to dance and caper in the air,
Would make me think them Bastards, not my sons,
But that I know they issued from thy womb,
That never looked on man but Tamburlaine.
My gracious Lord, they have their mother's looks,
But when they list, their conquering father's heart.
This lovely boy, the youngest of the three,
Not long ago bestrid a Scythian Steed,
Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove,
Which when he tainted with his slender rod,
He reined him straight, and made him so curvet
As I cried out for fear he should have fall'n.
Well done, my boy! thou shalt have shield and lance,
Armor of proof, horse, helm, and Curtle-axe,
And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe
And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
If thou wilt love the wars and follow me,
Thou shalt be made a King and reign with me,
Keeping in iron cages Emperors.
If thou exceed thy elder Brothers' worth,
And shine in complete virtue more than they,
Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed
Shall issue crowned from their mother's womb.
Yes, father; you shall see me, if I live,
Have under me as many kings as you,
And march with such a multitude of men
As all the world shall tremble at their view.
These words assure me, boy, thou art my son.
When I am old and cannot manage arms,
Be thou the scourge and terror of the world.
Why may not I, my Lord, as well as he,
Be termed the scourge and terror to the world?
Be all a scourge and terror to the world,
Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.
But while my brothers follow arms, my lord,
Let me accompany my gracious mother.
They are enough to conquer all the world,
And you have won enough for me to keep.
Bastardly boy, sprung from some coward's loins,
And not the issue of great Tamburlaine!
Of all the provinces I have subdued
Thou shalt not have a foot, unless thou bear
A mind courageous and invincible;
For he shall wear the crown of Persia
Whose head hath deepest scars, whose breast most wounds.
Which being wroth sends lightning from his eyes,
And in the furrows of his frowning brows
Harbors revenge, war, death, and cruelty;
For in a field, whose superficies
Is covered with a liquid purple veil
And sprinkled with the brains of slaughtered men,
My royal chair of state shall be advanced;
And he that means to place himself therein,
Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.
My lord, such speeches to our princely sons
Dismay their minds before they come to prove
The wounding troubles angry war affords.
No, Madam, these are speeches fit for us,
For if his chair were in a sea of blood,
I would prepare a ship and sail to it,
Ere I would lose the title of a king.
And I would strive to swim through pools of blood
Or make a bridge of murdered Carcasses,
Whose arches should be framed with bones of Turks,
Ere I would lose the title of a king.
Well, lovely boys, you shall be Emperors both,
Stretching your conquering arms from east to west.
And, sirrah, if you mean to wear a crown,
When we shall meet the Turkish Deputy
And all his Viceroys, snatch it from his head,
And cleave his Pericranion with thy sword.
If any man will hold him, I will strike
And cleave him to the channel with my sword.
Hold him, and cleave him too, or I'll cleave thee;
For we will march against them presently.
Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane
Promised to meet me on Larissa plains
With hosts apiece against this Turkish crew;
For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet
To make it parcel of my Empery.
The trumpets sound, Zenocrate; they come.
Welcome Theridamas, king of Argier.
My lord, the great and mighty Tamburlaine,
Archmonarch of the world, I offer here
My crown, myself, and all the power I have,
In all affection at thy kingly feet.
Under my colors march ten thousand Greeks,
And of argier and Afric's frontier towns
Twice twenty thousand valiant men-at-arms,
All which have sworn to sack Natolia.
Five hundred Brigandines are under sail,
Meet for your service on the sea, my lord,
That, launching from argier to tripoli,
Will quickly ride before Natolia,
And batter down the castles on the shore.
Well said, argier; receive thy crown again.
Kings of Morocco and of Fez, welcome.
Magnificent and peerless Tamburlaine,
I and my neighbor king of Fez have brought,
To aid thee in this Turkish expedition,
A hundred thousand expert soldiers;
From Azamor to Tunis near the sea
Is Barbary unpeopled for thy sake,
And all the men in armor under me,
Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.
Thanks, king of Morocco; take your crown again.
And, mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly God,
Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
I here present thee with the crown of Fez,
And with an host of Moors trained to the war,
Whose coal-black faces make their foes retire
And quake for fear, as if infernal Jove,
Meaning to aid thee in these Turkish arms,
Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
And millions of his strong tormenting spirits;
From strong Tesella unto Biledull
All Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake.
Thanks, king of Fez; take here thy crown again.
Your presence, loving friends and fellow kings,
Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy.
If all the crystal gates of Jove's high court
Were opened wide, and I might enter in
To see the state and majesty of heaven,
It could not more delight me than your sight.
Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
And after march to Turkey with our Camp,
In number more than are the drops that fall
When Boreas rents a thousand swelling clouds.
And proud Orcanes of Natolia
With all his viceroys shall be so afraid,
That though the stones, as at Deucalion's flood,
Were turned to men, he should be overcome.
Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
That Jove shall send his winged Messenger
To bid me sheathe my sword and leave the field;
The Sun, unable to sustain the sight,
Shall hide his head in Thetis' watery lap,
And leave his steeds to fair Bootes' charge;
For half the world shall perish in this fight.
But now, my friends, let me examine ye;
How have ye spent your absent time from me?
My Lord, our men of Barbary have marched
Four hundred miles with armor on their backs,
And lain in leaguer fifteen months and more;
For, since we left you at the Soldan's court,
We have subdued the Southern Guallatia
And all the land unto the coast of Spain.
We kept the narrow strait of Gibraltar,
And made Canaria call us kings and Lords:
Yet never did they recreate themselves,
Or cease one day from war and hot alarms;
And therefore let them rest a while, my Lord.
They shall, Casane, and 'tis time, i' faith.
And I have marched along the river Nile
To Machda, where the mighty Christian Priest,
Called John the great, sits in a milk-white robe,
Whose triple Miter I did take by force,
And made him swear obedience to my crown.
From thence unto Cazates did I march,
Where Amazonians met me in the field,
With whom (being women), I vouchsafed a league,
And with my power did march to Zanzibar,
The Western part of Afric, where I viewed
The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes,
But neither man nor child in all the land.
Therefore I took my course to Manico,
Where, unresisted, I removed my camp;
And, by the coast of Byather, at last
I came to Cubar, where the Negroes dwell,
And, conquering that, made haste to Nubia.
There, having sacked Borno, the Kingly seat,
I took the king and led him bound in chains
Unto Damascus, where I stayed before.
Well done, Techelles. what saith Theridamas?
I left the confines and the bounds of Afric,
And made a voyage into Europe,
Where, by the river Tyros, I subdued
Stoka, Padalia, and Codemia;
Then crossed the sea and came to Oblia
And Nigra Silva, where the Devils dance,
Which, in despite of them, I set on fire.
From thence I crossed the Gulf called by the name
Mare magiore of th' inhabitants.
Yet shall my soldiers make no period
Until Natolia kneel before your feet.
Then will we triumph, banquet, and carouse.
Cooks shall have pensions to provide us cates
And glut us with the dainties of the world;
Lachryma Christi and Calabrian wines
Shall common Soldiers drink in quaffing bowls,
Ay, liquid gold, when we have conquered him,
Mingled with coral and with orient pearl.
Come, let us banquet and carouse the whiles.
Now say, my Lords of Buda and Bohemia,
What motion is it that inflames your thoughts,
And stirs your valors to such sudden arms?
Your Majesty remembers, I am sure,
What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods
These heathenish Turks and Pagans lately made
Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius;
How through the midst of Varna and Bulgaria,
And almost to the very walls of Rome,
They have, not long since, massacred our Camp.
It resteth now, then, that your Majesty
Take all advantages of time and power,
And work revenge upon these Infidels.
Your highness knows, for Tamburlaine's repair,
That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
Natolia hath dismissed the greatest part
Of all his army pitched against our power
Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius' mount,
And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
Acantha, Antioch, and Caesarea,
To aid the kings of Soria and Jerusalem.
Now, then, my Lord, advantage take hereof
And issue suddenly upon the rest,
That in the fortune of their overthrow
We may discourage all the pagan troop
That dare attempt to war with Christians.
But calls not then your Grace to memory
The league we lately made with king Orcanes,
Confirmed by oath and Articles of peace,
And calling Christ for record of our truths?
This should be treachery and violence
Against the grace of our profession.
No whit, my Lord; for with such Infidels,
In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
We are not bound to those accomplishments
The holy laws of Christendom enjoin;
But as the faith which they profanely plight
Is not by necessary policy
To be esteemed assurance for ourselves,
So what we vow to them should not infringe
Our liberty of arms and victory.
Though I confess the oaths they undertake
Breed little strength to our security,
Yet those infirmities that thus defame
Their faiths, their honors, and religion
Should not give us presumption to the like.
Our faiths are sound, and must be consummate,
Religious, righteous, and inviolate.
Assure your Grace, 'tis superstition
To stand so strictly on dispensive faith;
And should we lose the opportunity
That God hath given to venge our Christians' death
And scourge their foul blasphemous Paganism,
As fell to Saul, to Balaam, and the rest,
That would not kill and curse at God's command,
So surely will the vengeance of the highest,
And jealous anger of his fearful arm,
Be poured with rigor on our sinful heads,
If we neglect this offered victory.
Then arm, my Lords, and issue suddenly,
Giving commandment to our general host,
With expedition to assail the Pagan,
And take the victory our God hath given. 
Gazellus, Uribassa, and the rest,
Now will we march from proud Orminius' mount
To fair Natolia, where our neighbor kings
Expect our power and our royal presence,
T' encounter with the cruel Tamburlaine,
That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host,
And with the thunder of his martial tools
Makes Earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven.
And now come we to make his sinews shake
With greater power than erst his pride hath felt,
An hundred kings, by scores, will bid him arms,
And hundred thousands subjects to each score;
Which, if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
Should break out of the bowels of the clouds
And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
Yet should our courages and steeled crests,
And numbers more than infinite of men,
Be able to withstand and conquer him.
Methinks I see how glad the Christian King
Is made for joy of your admitted truce,
That could not but before be terrified
With unacquainted power of our host.
Arm, dread Sovereign, and my noble Lords!
The treacherous army of the Christians,
Taking advantage of your slender power,
Comes marching on us, and determines straight
To bid us battle for our dearest lives.
Traitors, villains, damned Christians!
Have I not here the articles of peace
And solemn covenants we have both confirmed,
He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet?
Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
That with such treason seek our overthrow,
And care so little for their prophet Christ!
Can there be such deceit in Christians
Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
Then if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
But in their deeds deny him for their Christ,
If he be son to ever-living Jove,
And hath the power of his outstretched arm,
If he be jealous of his name and honor
As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
Take here these papers as our sacrifice
And witness of thy servant's perjury.
Open, thou shining veil of Cynthia,
And make a passage from the empyreal heaven,
That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
But everywhere fills every Continent
With strange infusion of his sacred vigor,
May, in his endless power and purity,
Behold and venge this Traitor's perjury!
Thou Christ that art esteemed omnipotent,
If thou wilt prove thyself a perfect God,
Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
Be now revenged upon this Traitor's soul,
And make the power I have left behind
(Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
Sufficient to discomfort and confound
The trustless force of those false Christians.
To arms, my Lords! on Christ still let us cry.
If there be Christ, we shall have victory. 
Discomfited is all the Christian host,
And God hath thundered vengeance from on high,
For my accursed and hateful perjury.
O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
Let the dishonor of the pains I feel
In this my mortal well deserved wound
End all my penance in my sudden death!
And let this death, wherein to sin I die,
Conceive a second life in endless mercy!
Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,
And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend.
See here the perjured traitor Hungary,
Bloody and breathless for his villainy.
Now shall his barbarous body be a prey
To beasts and fowls, and all the winds shall breathe
Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.
Now scalds his soul in the Tartarian streams
And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell,
That zoacum, that fruit of bitterness,
That in the midst of fire is ingraft,
Yet flourisheth as Flora in her pride,
With apples like the heads of damned Fiends.
The Devils there, in chains of quenchless flame,
Shall lead his soul through Orcus' burning gulf,
From pain to pain, whose change shall never end.
What say'st thou yet, Gazellus, to his foil,
Which we referred to justice of his Christ
And to his power, which here appears as full
As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?
'tis but the fortune of the wars, my Lord,
Whose power is often proved a miracle.
Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honored,
Not doing Mahomet an injury,
Whose power had share in this our victory;
And since this miscreant hath disgraced his faith
And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk
Amidst these plains for Fowls to prey upon.
Go, Uribassa, give it straight in charge.
And now, Gazellus, let us haste and meet
Our army, and our brother of Jerusalem,
Of Soria, Trebizon, and Amasia,
And happily, with full Natolian bowls
Of Greekish wine, now let us celebrate
Our happy conquest and his angry fate. 
Black is the beauty of the brightest day;
The golden ball of heaven's eternal fire,
That danced with glory on the silver waves,
Now wants the fuel that inflamed his beams,
And all with faintness and for foul disgrace,
He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
Ready to darken earth with endless night.
Zenocrate, that gave him light and life,
Whose eyes shot fire from their Ivory bowers,
And tempered every soul with lively heat,
Now by the malice of the angry Skies,
Whose jealousy admits no second Mate,
Draws in the comfort of her latest breath,
All dazzled with the hellish mists of death.
Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
As Sentinels to warn th' immortal souls
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Apollo, Cynthia, and the ceaseless lamps
That gently looked upon this loathsome earth,
Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
The crystal springs, whose taste illuminates
Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
Like tried silver run through Paradise
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
The Cherubins and holy Seraphins,
That sing and play before the king of kings,
Use all their voices and their instruments
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
And in this sweet and curious harmony,
The God that tunes this music to our souls
Holds out his hand in highest majesty
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts
Up to the palace of th' empyreal heaven,
That this my life may be as short to me
As are the days of sweet Zenocrate.
Physicians, will no physic do her good?
My lord, your Majesty shall soon perceive,
And if she pass this fit, the worst is past.
Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate?
I fare, my Lord, as other Empresses,
That, when this frail and transitory flesh
Hath sucked the measure of that vital air
That feeds the body with his dated health,
Wane with enforced and necessary change.
May never such a change transform my love,
In whose sweet being I repose my life,
Whose heavenly presence, beautified with health,
Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars,
Whose absence makes the sun and Moon as dark
As when, opposed in one Diameter,
Their Spheres are mounted on the serpent's head,
Or else descended to his winding train.
Live still, my Love, and so conserve my life,
Or, dying, be the author of my death.
Live still, my Lord! O, let my sovereign live!
And sooner let the fiery Element
Dissolve and make your kingdom in the Sky,
Than this base earth should shroud your majesty;
For, should I but suspect your death by mine,
The comfort of my future happiness
And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
Turned to despair, would break my wretched breast,
And fury would confound my present rest.
But let me die, my Love; yes, let me die;
With love and patience let your true love die.
Your grief and fury hurts my second life.
Yet let me kiss my lord before I die,
And let me die with kissing of my Lord.
But since my life is lengthened yet a while,
Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
And of my Lords, whose true nobility
Have merited my latest memory.
Sweet sons, farewell! in death resemble me,
And in your lives your father's excellency.
Some music, and my fit will cease, my Lord.
Proud fury and intolerable fit,
That dares torment the body of my love
And scourge the Scourge of the immortal God!
Now are those Spheres, where Cupid used to sit,
Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death,
Whose darts do pierce the Center of my soul.
Her sacred beauty hath enchanted heaven,
And had she lived before the siege of Troy,
Helen, whose beauty summoned Greece to arms
And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
Had not been named in Homer's Iliads;
Her name had been in every line he wrote.
Or, had those wanton Poets, for whose birth
Old Rome was proud, but gazed a while on her,
Nor Lesbia nor Corinna had been named;
Zenocrate had been the argument
Of every Epigram or Elegy.
What, is she dead? Techelles, draw thy sword
And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain
And we descend into th' infernal vaults,
To hale the fatal Sisters by the hair
And throw them in the triple moat of Hell,
For taking hence my fair Zenocrate.
Casane and Theridamas, to arms!
Raise Cavalieros higher than the clouds,
And with the cannon break the frame of heaven.
Batter the shining palace of the Sun,
And shiver all the starry firmament,
For amorous Jove hath snatched my love from hence,
Meaning to make her stately Queen of heaven.
What God soever holds thee in his arms,
Giving thee Nectar and Ambrosia,
Behold me here, divine Zenocrate,
Raving, impatient, desperate, and mad,
Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
The rusty beams of Janus' Temple doors,
Letting out death and tyrannizing war,
To march with me under this bloody flag!
And, if thou pitiest Tamburlaine the great,
Come down from heaven, and live with me again!
Ah, good my Lord, be patient! she is dead,
And all this raging cannot make her live.
If words might serve, our voice hath rent the air;
If tears, our eyes have watered all the earth;
If grief, our murdered hearts have strained forth blood.
Nothing prevails, for she is dead, my Lord.
For she is dead! thy words do pierce my soul!
Ah, sweet Theridamas, say no more.
Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives
And feed my mind that dies for want of her.
Where'er her soul be, thou shalt stay with me,
Embalmed with Cassia, Ambergris, and Myrrh,
Not lapped in lead, but in a sheet of gold,
And till I die thou shalt not be interred.
Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus'
We both will rest and have one Epitaph
Writ in as many several languages
As I have conquered kingdoms with my sword.
This cursed town will I consume with fire,
Because this place bereft me of my Love;
The houses, burnt, will look as if they mourned;
And here will I set up her statue
And march about it with my mourning camp,
Drooping and pining for Zenocrate.
Callapinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and
successive heir to the late mighty Emperor Bajazeth,
by the aid of God and his friend Mahomet, Emperor of
Natolia, Jerusalem, Trebizon, Soria, Amasia, Thracia,
Illyria, Carmonia, and all the hundred and thirty
Kingdoms late contributory to his mighty father.
Long live Callapinus, Emperor of Turkey!
Thrice worthy kings, of Natolia and the rest,
I will requite your royal gratitudes
With all the benefits my Empire yields;
And were the sinews of th' imperial seat
So knit and strengthened as when Bajazeth,
My royal Lord and father, filled the throne,
Whose cursed fate hath so dismembered it,
Then should you see this Thief of Scythia,
This proud usurping king of Persia,
Do us such honor and supremacy,
Bearing the vengeance of our father's wrongs,
As all the world should blot our dignities
Out of the book of base-born infamies.
And now I doubt not but your royal cares
Hath so provided for this cursed foe,
That, since the heir of mighty Bajazeth
(An Emperor so honored for his virtues)
Revives the spirits of true Turkish hearts,
In grievous memory of his father's shame,
We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
But that proud Fortune, who hath followed long
The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
Will now retain her old inconstancy
And raise our honors to as high a pitch,
In this our strong and fortunate encounter;
For so hath heaven provided my escape
From all the cruelty my soul sustained,
By this my friendly keeper's happy means,
That Jove, surcharged with pity of our wrongs,
Will pour it down in showers on our heads,
Scourging the pride of cursed Tamburlaine.
I have a hundred thousand men in arms,
Some, that in conquest of the perjured Christian,
Being a handful to a mighty host,
Think them in number yet sufficient
To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
And for their power enow to win the world.
And I as many from Jerusalem,
Judaea, Gaza, and Scalonians' bounds,
That on mount Sinai, with their ensigns spread,
Look like the parti-colored clouds of heaven
That show fair weather to the neighbor morn.
And I as many bring from Trebizon,
Chio, Famastro, and Amasia,
All bordering on the Mare major sea,
Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns
That touch the end of famous Euphrates,
Whose courages are kindled with the flames
The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
And vow to burn the villain's cruel heart.
From Soria with seventy thousand strong,
Ta'en from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoli,
And so unto my city of Damascus,
I march to meet and aid my neighbor kings,
All which will join against this Tamburlaine
And bring him captive to your highness' feet.
Our battle then, in martial manner pitched,
According to our ancient use, shall bear
The figure of the semicircled Moon,
Whose horns shall sprinkle through the tainted air
The poisoned brains of this proud Scythian.
Well, then, my noble Lords, for this my friend
That freed me from the bondage of my foe,
I think it requisite and honorable
To keep my promise and to make him king,
That is a Gentleman, I know, at least.
That's no matter, sir, for being a king, for
Tamburlaine came up of nothing.
Your majesty may choose some 'pointed time,
Performing all your promise to the full.
'Tis nought for your majesty to give a kingdom.
Then will I shortly keep my promise, Almeda.
Why, I thank your Majesty. 
So burn the turrets of this cursed town,
Flame to the highest region of the air,
And kindle heaps of exhalations
That, being fiery meteors, may presage
Death and destruction to th' inhabitants!
Over my Zenith hang a blazing star,
That may endure till heaven be dissolved,
Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
Threatening a death and famine to this land!
Flying Dragons, lightning, fearful thunderclaps,
Singe these fair plains, and make them seem as black
As is the Island where the Furies mask,
Compassed with lethe, styx, and phlegethon,
Because my dear Zenocrate is dead.
This pillar, placed in memory of her,
Where in Arabian, hebrew, Greek, is writ,
This town being burnt by Tamburlaine the great,
Forbids the world to build it up again.
And here this mournful streamer shall be placed,
Wrought with the Persian and Egyptian arms,
To signify she was a princess born
And wife unto the Monarch of the East.
And here this table as a Register
Of all her virtues and perfections.
And here the picture of Zenocrate,
To show her beauty which the world admired;
Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
That, hanging here, will draw the Gods from heaven
And cause the stars fixed in the Southern arc,
(Whose lovely faces never any viewed
That have not passed the Center's latitude,)
As Pilgrims travel to our Hemisphere,
Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
Thou shalt not beautify Larissa plains,
But keep within the circle of mine arms;
At every town and castle I besiege,
Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent;
And when I meet an army in the field,
Those looks will shed such influence in my camp,
As if Bellona, Goddess of the war,
Threw naked swords and sulphur balls of fire
Upon the heads of all our enemies.
And now, my Lords, advance your spears again.
Sorrow no more, my sweet Casane, now.
Boys, leave to mourn; this town shall ever mourn,
Being burnt to cinders for your mother's death.
If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
It would not ease the sorrows I sustain.
As is that town, so is my heart consumed
With grief and sorrow for my mother's death.
My mother's death hath mortified my mind,
And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.
But now, my boys, leave off and list to me,
That mean to teach you rudiments of war.
I'll have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
March in your armor through watery Fens,
Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
Hunger and thirst, right adjuncts of the war.
And after this, to scale a castle wall,
Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
And make whole cities caper in the air.
Then next, the way to fortify your men,
In champion grounds what figure serves you best,
For which the quinque-angle form is meet,
Because the corners there may fall more flat
Whereas the Fort may fittest be assailed,
And sharpest where th' assault is desperate.
The ditches must be deep, the Counterscarps
Narrow and steep, the walls made high and broad,
The Bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
With Cavalieros and thick counterforts,
And room within to lodge six thousand men.
It must have privy ditches, countermines,
And secret issuings to defend the ditch.
It must have high Argins and covered ways
To keep the bulwark fronts from battery,
And Parapets to hide the Musketeers,
Casemates to place the great Artillery,
And store of ordnance, that from every flank
May scour the outward curtains of the Fort,
Dismount the Cannon of the adverse part,
Murder the Foe, and save the walls from breach.
When this is learned for service on the land,
By plain and easy demonstration
I'll teach you how to make the water mount,
That you may dryfoot march through lakes and pools,
Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
And make a Fortress in the raging waves,
Fenced with the concave of a monstrous rock,
Invincible by nature of the place.
When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
And worthy sons of Tamburlaine the great.
My Lord, but this is dangerous to be done;
We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.
Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
And fear'st to die, or with a Curtle-axe
To hew thy flesh, and make a gaping wound?
Hast thou beheld a peal of ordnance strike
A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse,
Whose shattered limbs, being tossed as high as heaven,
Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
And canst thou, Coward, stand in fear of death?
Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
Dyeing their lances with their streaming blood,
And yet at night carouse within my tent,
Filling their empty veins with airy wine,
That, being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds?
View me, thy father, that hath conquered kings,
And with his host marched round about the earth,
Quite void of scars and clear from any wound,
That by the wars lost not a dram of blood,
And see him lance his flesh to teach you all.
A wound is nothing, be it ne'er so deep;
Blood is the God of War's rich livery.
Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
As great a grace and majesty to me,
As if a chair of gold enameled,
Enchased with Diamonds, Sapphires, Rubies,
And fairest pearl of wealthy India,
Were mounted here under a Canopy,
And I sat down, clothed with the massy robe
That late adorned the Afric Potentate,
Whom I brought bound unto Damascus' walls.
Come, boys, and with your fingers search my wound,
And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
Now, my boys, what think you of a wound?
I know not what I should think of it.
Methinks 'tis a pitiful sight.
'Tis nothing. give me a wound, father.
Here, father, cut it bravely, as you did your own.
It shall suffice thou dar'st abide a wound.
My boy, thou shalt not lose a drop of blood
Before we meet the army of the Turk;
But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
Dreadless of blows, of bloody wounds, and death;
And let the burning of Larissa walls,
My speech of war, and this my wound you see,
Teach you, my boys, to bear courageous minds,
Fit for the followers of great Tamburlaine.
Usumcasane, now come let us march
Towards Techelles and Theridamas,
That we have sent before to fire the towns,
The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
And hunt that Coward faint-heart runaway,
With that accursed traitor, Almeda,
Till fire and sword have found them at a bay.
I long to pierce his bowels with my sword,
That hath betrayed my gracious Sovereign,
That cursed and damned Traitor, Almeda.
Then let us see if coward Callapine
Dare levy arms against our puissance,
That we may tread upon his captive neck,
And treble all his father's slaveries. 
Thus have we marched northward from Tamburlaine,
Unto the frontier point of Soria,
And this is Balsera, their chiefest hold,
Wherein is all the treasure of the land.
Then let us bring our light Artillery,
Minions, Falc'nets, and Sakers, to the trench,
Filling the ditches with the walls' wide breach,
And enter in to seize upon the gold.
How say ye, Soldiers, Shall we not?
Yes, my Lord, yes; come, let's about it.
But stay a while; summon a parle, Drum.
It may be they will yield it quietly,
Knowing two kings, the friends to Tamburlaine,
Stand at the walls with such a mighty power.
What require you, my masters?
Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to us.
To you! Why, do you think me weary of it?
Nay, Captain, thou art weary of thy life
If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlaine.
These Pioners of Argier in Africa
Even in the cannon's face shall raise a hill
Of earth and fagots higher than thy Fort,
And over thy Argins and covered ways
Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
Volleys of ordnance, till the breach be made
That with his ruin fills up all the trench;
And, when we enter in, not heaven itself
Shall ransom thee, thy wife, and family.
Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes
That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
And lie in trench before thy castle walls,
That no supply of victual shall come in,
Nor (any) issue forth but they shall die;
And, therefore, Captain, yield it quietly.
Were you, that are the friends of Tamburlaine,
Brothers to holy Mahomet himself,
I would not yield it; therefore do your worst.
Raise mounts, batter, intrench, and undermine,
Cut off the water, all convoys that can,
Yet I am resolute: and so, farewell.
Pioners, away! and where I stuck the stake,
Intrench with those dimensions I prescribed;
Cast up the earth towards the castle wall,
Which, till it may defend you, labor low,
And few or none shall perish by their shot.
A hundred horse shall scout about the plains
To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
Both we, Theridamas, will intrench our men,
And with the Jacob's staff measure the height
And distance of the castle from the trench,
That we may know if our artillery
Will carry full point blank unto their walls.
Then see the bringing of our ordnance
Along the trench into the battery,
Where we will have Gabions of six foot broad,
To save our Cannoneers from musket shot;
Betwixt which shall our ordnance thunder forth,
And with the breach's fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
The crack, the Echo, and the soldier's cry,
Make deaf the air and dim the Crystal Sky.
Trumpets and drums, alarum presently!
And, soldiers, play the men; the hold is yours!
Come, good my Lord, and let us haste from hence
Along the cave that leads beyond the foe.
No hope is left to save this conquered hold.
A deadly bullet gliding through my side
Lies heavy on my heart; I cannot live.
I feel my liver pierced, and all my veins,
That there begin and nourish every part,
Mangled and torn, and all my entrails bathed
In blood that straineth from their orifex.
Farewell, sweet wife! sweet son, farewell! I die.
Death, whither art thou gone, that both we live?
Come back again, sweet death, and strike us both.
One minute end our days, and one sepulchre
Contain our bodies! death, why com'st thou not?
Well, this must be the messenger for thee.
Now, ugly death, stretch out thy Sable wings
And carry both our souls where his remains.
Tell me, sweet boy, art thou content to die?
These barbarous Scythians, full of cruelty,
And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
Will hew us piecemeal, put us to the wheel,
Or else invent some torture worse than that;
Therefore die by thy loving mother's hand,
Who gently now will lance thy Ivory throat
And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.
Mother, dispatch me, or I'll kill myself;
For think ye I can live and see him dead?
Give me your knife, good mother, or strike home;
The Scythians shall not tyrannize on me.
Sweet mother, strike, that I may meet my father.
Ah, sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
And purge my soul before it comes to thee.
How now, Madam! what are you doing?
Killing myself, as I have done my son,
Whose body, with his father's, I have burnt,
Lest cruel Scythians should dismember him.
'twas bravely done, and like a soldier's wife.
Thou shalt with us to Tamburlaine the great,
Who, when he hears how resolute thou wert,
Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.
My Lord deceased was dearer unto me
Than any Viceroy, King, or Emperor;
And for his sake here will I end my days.
But, Lady, go with us to Tamburlaine,
And thou shalt see a man greater than Mahomet,
In whose high looks is much more majesty
Than from the Concave superficies
Of Jove's vast palace, the empyreal Orb,
Unto the shining bower where Cynthia sits,
Like lovely Thetis, in a Crystal robe;
That treadeth Fortune underneath his feet
And makes the mighty God of arms his slave;
On whom death and the fatal sisters wait
With naked swords and scarlet liveries;
Before whom, mounted on a Lion's back,
Rhamnusia bears a helmet full of blood
And strows the way with brains of slaughtered men;
By whose proud side the ugly furies run,
Hearkening when he shall bid them plague the world.
Over whose Zenith, clothed in windy air,
And Eagle's wings joined to her feathered breast,
Fame hovereth, sounding of her golden Trump,
That to the adverse poles of that straight line
Which measureth the glorious frame of heaven
The name of mighty Tamburlaine is spread;
And him, fair Lady, shall thy eyes behold.
Take pity of a Lady's ruthful tears,
That humbly craves upon her knees to stay
And cast her body in the burning flame
That feeds upon her son's and husband's flesh.
Madam, sooner shall fire consume us both
Than scorch a face so beautiful as this,
In frame of which Nature hath showed more skill
Than when she gave eternal Chaos form,
Drawing from it the shining Lamps of heaven.
Madam, I am so far in love with you,
That you must go with us - no remedy.
Then carry me, I care not, where you will,
And let the end of this my fatal journey
Be likewise end to my accursed life.
No, Madam, but the beginning of your joy.
Soldiers, now let us meet the General,
Who by this time is at Natolia,
Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
The gold, the silver, and the pearl ye got,
Rifling this Fort, divide in equal shares:
This Lady shall have twice so much again
Out of the coffers of our treasury. 
Renowned Emperor, mighty Callapine,
God's great lieutenant over all the world,
Here at Aleppo, with an host of men,
Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persia,
(In number more than are the quivering leaves
Of Ida's forest, where your highness' hounds
With open cry pursue the wounded Stag,)
Who means to girt Natolia's walls with siege,
Fire the town, and overrun the land.
My royal army is as great as his,
That, from the bounds of Phrygia to the sea
Which washeth Cyprus with his brinish waves,
Covers the hills, the valleys, and the plains.
Viceroys and Peers of Turkey, play the men.
Whet all your swords to mangle Tamburlaine,
His sons, his Captains, and his followers.
By Mahomet, not one of them shall live.
The field wherein this battle shall be fought
For ever term the Persians' sepulchre,
In memory of this our victory.
Now he that calls himself the scourge of Jove,
The Emperor of the world, and earthly God,
Shall end the warlike progress he intends
And travel headlong to the lake of hell,
Where legions of devils (knowing he must die
Here in Natolia by your highness' hands),
All brandishing their brands of quenchless fire,
Stretching their monstrous paws, grin with their teeth,
And guard the gates to entertain his soul.
Tell me, Viceroys, the number of your men,
And what our Army royal is esteemed.
From Palestina and Jerusalem,
Of Hebrews three score thousand fighting men
Are come, since last we showed your majesty.
So from Arabia desert, and the bounds
Of that sweet land whose brave Metropolis
Re-edified the fair Semiramis,
Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
Since last we numbered to your Majesty.
From Trebizon in Asia the less,
Naturalized Turks and stout Bithynians
Came to my bands, full fifty thousand more,
That, fighting, know not what retreat doth mean,
Nor e'er return but with the victory,
Since last we numbered to your majesty.
Of Sorians from Halla is repaired,
And neighbor cities of your highness' land,
Ten thousand horse and thirty thousand foot,
Since last we numbered to your majesty;
So that the Army royal is esteemed
Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.
Then welcome, Tamburlaine, unto thy death.
Come, puissant Viceroys, let us to the field,
(The Persians' Sepulchre), and sacrifice
Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet,
Who now, with Jove, opens the firmament
To see the slaughter of our enemies.
How now, Casane! See, a knot of kings,
Sitting as if they were a-telling riddles.
My Lord, your presence makes them pale and wan.
Poor souls, they look as if their deaths were near.
Why, so he is, Casane; I am here.
But yet I'll save their lives and make them slaves.
Ye petty kings of Turkey, I am come,
As Hector did into the Grecian camp,
To overdare the pride of Graecia
And set his warlike person to the view
Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame.
I do you honor in the simile;
For, if I should, as Hector did Achilles,
(The worthiest knight that ever brandished sword,)
Challenge in combat any of you all,
I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
And fly my glove as from a Scorpion.
Now thou art fearful of thy army's strength,
Thou wouldst with overmatch of person fight.
But, Shepherd's issue, base-born Tamburlaine,
Think of thy end; this sword shall lance thy throat.
Villain, the shepherd's issue (at whose birth
Heaven did afford a gracious aspect,
And joined those stars that shall be opposite
Even till the dissolution to the world,
And never meant to make a Conqueror
So famous as is mighty Tamburlaine)
Shall so torment thee and that Callapine,
That, like a roguish runaway, suborned
That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
To false his service to his Sovereign,
As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.
Rail not, proud Scythian. I shall now revenge
My father's vile abuses and mine own.
By Mahomet, he shall be tied in chains,
Rowing with Christians in a Brigandine
About the Grecian Isles to rob and spoil,
And turn him to his ancient trade again.
Methinks the slave should make a lusty thief.
Nay, when the battle ends, all we will meet
And sit in council to invent some pain
That most may vex his body and his soul.
But as for you, Viceroy, you shall have bits,
And, harnessed like my horses, draw my coach;
And, when ye stay, be lashed with whips of wire.
I'll have you learn to feed on provender
And in a stable lie upon the planks.
But, Tamburlaine, first thou shalt kneel to us
And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.
The common soldiers of our mighty host
Shall bring thee bound unto the General's tent.
And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
Or bind thee in eternal torments' wrath.
Well, sirs, diet yourselves; you know I shall have
occasion shortly to journey you.
See, father, how Almeda the Jailor looks upon us.
Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
I'll make thee wish the earth had swallowed thee.
Seest thou not death within my wrathful looks?
Go, villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
Or rip thy bowels and rend out thy heart
T' appease my wrath; or else I'll torture thee,
Searing thy hateful flesh with burning irons
And drops of scalding lead, while all thy joints
Be racked and beat asunder with the wheel;
For, if thou liv'st, not any Element
Shall shroud thee from the wrath of Tamburlaine.
Well, in despite of thee, he shall be king.
Come, Almeda, receive this crown of me.
I here invest thee king of Ariadan,
Bordering on Mare Roso, near to Mecca.
But now, my followers and my loving friends,
Fight as you ever did, like Conquerors;
The glory of this happy day is yours.
My stern aspect shall make fair Victory,
Hovering betwixt our armies, light on me,
Loaden with Laurel wreaths to crown us all.
I smile to think how when this field is fought
And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
With carrying pearl and treasure on their backs.
You shall be princes all, immediately.
Come, fight, ye Turks, or yield us victory.
No; we will meet thee, slavish Tamburlaine.
Now in their glories shine the golden crowns
Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
That half dismay the majesty of heaven.
Now, brother, follow we our father's sword,
That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts
And cuts down armies with his conquering wings.
Call forth our lazy brother from the tent,
For if my father miss him in the field,
Wrath, kindled in the furnace of his breast,
Will send a deadly lightning to his heart.
Brother, ho! what, given so much to sleep,
You cannot leave it when our enemies' drums
And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
Our proper ruin and our father's foil?
Away, ye fools! my father needs not me,
Nor you, in faith, but that you will be thought
More childish valorous than manly wise.
If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
My father were enough to scar the foe.
You do dishonor to his majesty,
To think our helps will do him any good.
What, dar'st thou, then, be absent from the fight,
Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
And oft hath warned thee to be still in field,
When he himself amidst the thickest troops
Beats down our foes to flesh our taintless swords?
I know, sir, what it is to kill a man;
It works remorse of conscience in me.
I take no pleasure to be murderous,
Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.
O cowardly boy! fie, for shame, come forth!
Thou dost dishonor manhood and thy house.
Go, go, tall stripling, fight you for us both,
And take my other toward brother here,
For person like to prove a second Mars,
'Twill please my mind as well to hear both you
Have won a heap of honor in the field
And left your slender carcasses behind,
As if I lay with you for company.
You will not go, then? You say true.
Were all the lofty mounts of Zona mundi
That fill the midst of farthest Tartary
Turned into pearl and proffered for my stay,
I would not bide the fury of my father,
When, made a victor in these haughty arms,
He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
In all the honors he proposed for us.
Take you the honor, I will take my ease;
My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice.
I go into the field before I need?
The bullets fly at random where they list;
And should I go and kill a thousand men,
I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
And sooner far than he that never fights;
And should I go and do nor harm nor good,
I might have harm, which all the good I have,
Joined with my father's crown, would never cure.
See now, ye slaves, my children stoop your pride
And lead your glories sheeplike to the sword.
Bring them, my boys, and tell me if the wars
Be not a life that may illustrate Gods,
And tickle not your Spirits with desire
Still to be trained in arms and chivalry?
Shall we let go these kings again, my Lord,
To gather greater numbers 'gainst our power,
That they may say it is not chance doth this,
But matchless strength and magnanimity?
No, no, Amyras; tempt not Fortune so.
Cherish thy valor still with fresh supplies,
And glut it not with stale and daunted foes.
But where's this coward villain, not my son,
But traitor to my name and majesty?
Image of sloth, and picture of a slave,
The obloquy and scorn of my renown!
How may my heart, thus fired with mine eyes,
Wounded with shame and killed with discontent,
Shroud any thought may hold my striving hands
From martial justice on thy wretched soul?
Yet pardon him, I pray your Majesty.
Let all of us entreat your highness' pardon.
Stand up, ye base, unworthy soldiers!
Know ye not yet the argument of Arms?
Good, my Lord, let him be forgiven for once,
And we will force him to the field hereafter.
Stand up, my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
And what the jealousy of wars must do.
O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
And joyed the fire of this martial flesh,
Blush, blush, fair city, at thine honor's foil,
And shame of nature, which Jaertis' stream,
Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
Can never wash from thy distained brows!
Here, Jove, receive his fainting soul again,
A form not meet to give that subject essence
Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlaine,
Wherein an incorporeal spirit moves,
Made of the mold whereof thyself consists,
Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
Ready to levy power against thy throne,
That I might move the turning Spheres of heaven;
For earth and all this airy region
Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
By Mahomet, thy mighty friend, I swear,
In sending to my issue such a soul,
Created of the massy dregs of earth,
The scum and tartar of the Elements,
Wherein was neither courage, strength, or wit,
But folly, sloth, and damned idleness,
Thou hast procured a greater enemy
Than he that darted mountains at thy head,
Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears,
Whereat thou trembling hidd'st thee in the air,
Clothed with a pitchy cloud for being seen.
And now, ye cankered curs of Asia,
That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
Although it shine as brightly as the Sun,
Now you shall feel the strength of Tamburlaine,
And, by the state of his supremacy,
Approve the difference 'twixt himself and you.
Thou show'st the difference 'twixt ourselves and thee,
In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.
Thy victories are grown so violent,
That shortly heaven, filled with the meteors
Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
Will pour down blood and fire on thy head,
Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
And, with our bloods, revenge our bloods on thee.
Villains, these terrors, and these tyrannies
(If tyrannies war's justice ye repute),
I execute, enjoined me from above,
To scourge the pride of such as heaven abhors;
Nor am I made Archmonarch of the world,
Crowned and invested by the hand of Jove,
For deeds of bounty or nobility;
But since I exercise a greater name,
The Scourge of God and terror of the world,
I must apply myself to fit those terms,
In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
And plague such Peasants as resist in me
The power of heaven's eternal majesty.
Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane,
Ransack the tents and the pavilions
Of these proud Turks, and take their Concubines,
Making them bury this effeminate brat;
For not a common Soldier shall defile
His manly fingers with so faint a boy.
Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
And I'll dispose them as it likes me best.
Meanwhile, take him in.  We will, my Lord.
O damned monster! nay, a Fiend of Hell,
Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
Nor yet imposed with such a bitter hate!
Revenge it, Rhadamanth and Aeacus,
And let your hates, extended in his pains,
Expel the hate wherewith he pains our souls!
May never day give virtue to his eyes,
Whose sight, composed of fury and of fire,
Doth send such stern affections to his heart!
May never spirit, vein, or Artery, feed
The cursed substance of that cruel heart;
But, wanting moisture and remorseful blood,
Dry up with anger, and consume with heat!
Well, bark, ye dogs. I'll bridle all your tongues
And bind them close with bits of burnished steel,
Down to the channels of your hateful throats;
And, with the pains my rigor shall inflict,
I'll make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
The far resounding torments ye sustain;
As when an herd of lusty Cimbrian Bulls
Run mourning round about the Females' miss,
And, stung with fury of their following,
Fill all the air with troublous bellowing.
I will, with Engines never exercised,
Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
Your cities and your golden palaces,
And with the flames that beat against the clouds,
Incense the heavens and make the stars to melt,
As if they were the tears of Mahomet
For hot consumption of his country's pride.
And, till by vision or by speech I hear
Immortal Jove say 'Cease, my Tamburlaine,'
I will persist a terror to the world,
Making the Meteors (that like armed men
Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven)
Run tilting round about the firmament
And break their burning Lances in the air,
For honor of my wondrous victories.
Come, bring them in to our Pavilion. 
Distressed Olympia, whose weeping eyes,
Since thy arrival here beheld no Sun,
But, closed within the compass of a tent,
Have stained thy cheeks, and made thee look like Death,
Devise some means to rid thee of thy life,
Rather than yield to his detested suit,
Whose drift is only to dishonor thee;
And since this earth, dewed with thy brinish tears,
Affords no herbs whose taste may poison thee,
Nor yet this air, beat often with thy sighs,
Contagious smells and vapors to infect thee,
Nor thy close Cave a sword to murder thee,
Let this invention be the instrument.
Well met, Olympia. I sought thee in my tent,
But when I saw the place obscure and dark,
Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
Enraged, I ran about the fields for thee,
Supposing amorous Jove had sent his son,
The winged Hermes, to convey thee hence.
But now I find thee, and that fear is past.
Tell me, Olympia, wilt thou grant my suit?
My lord and husband's death, with my sweet son's,
(With whom I buried all affections
Save grief and sorrow, which torment my heart),
Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
That tends to love, and meditate on death,
A fitter subject for a pensive soul.
Olympia, pity him in whom thy looks
Have greater operation and more force
Than Cynthia's in the watery wilderness,
For with thy view my joys are at the full,
And ebb again as thou depart'st from me.
Ah, pity me, my Lord, and draw your sword,
Making a passage for my troubled soul,
Which beats against this prison to get out
And meet my husband and my loving son.
Nothing but still thy husband and thy son?
Leave this, my Love, and listen more to me:
Thou shalt be stately Queen of fair Argier,
And, clothed in costly cloth of massy gold,
Upon the marble turrets of my Court
Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
Commanding all thy princely eye desires;
And I will cast off arms to sit with thee,
Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.
No such discourse is pleasant in mine ears,
But that where every period ends with death,
And every line begins with death again.
I cannot love to be an Empress.
Nay Lady, then, if nothing will prevail,
I'll use some other means to make you yield.
Such is the sudden fury of my love,
I must and will be pleased, and you shall yield.
Come to the tent again.
Stay, good my Lord, and, will you save my honor,
I'll give your Grace a present of such price
As all the world cannot afford the like.
An ointment which a cunning Alchemist
Distilled from the purest Balsamum
And simplest extracts of all Minerals,
In which the essential form of Marble stone,
Tempered by science metaphysical,
And Spells of magic from the mouths of spirits,
With which if you but 'noint your tender Skin,
Nor Pistol, Sword, nor Lance, can pierce your flesh.
Why, Madam, think ye to mock me thus palpably?
To prove it, I will 'noint my naked throat,
Which when you stab, look on your weapon's point,
And you shall see't rebated with the blow.
Why gave you not your husband some of it,
If you loved him, and it so precious?
My purpose was, my Lord, to spend it so,
But was prevented by his sudden end;
And for a present easy proof hereof,
That I dissemble not, try it on me.
I will, Olympia, and will keep it for
The richest present of this Eastern world.
Now stab, my Lord, and mark your weapon's point,
That will be blunted if the blow be great.
{Here, then, Olympia.}
What, have I slain her? Villain, stab thyself!
Cut off this arm that murdered my Love,
In whom the learned Rabbis of this age
Might find as many wondrous miracles
As in the Theoria of the world.
Now Hell is fairer than Elysium;
A greater Lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
From whence the stars do borrow all their light,
Wanders about the black circumference;
And now the damned souls are free from pain,
For every Fury gazeth on her looks.
Infernal Dis is courting of my love,
Inventing masks and stately shows for her,
Opening the doors of his rich treasury
To entertain this Queen of chastity,
Whose body shall be tombed with all the pomp
The treasure of my kingdom may afford.
Holla, ye pampered Jades of Asia!
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day,
And have so proud a chariot at your heels,
And such a Coachman as great Tamburlaine,
But from Asphaltis, where I conquered you,
To Byron here, where thus I honor you?
The horse that guide the golden eye of heaven
And blow the morning from their nostrils,
Making their fiery gait above the clouds,
Are not so honored in their Governor
As you, ye slaves, in mighty Tamburlaine.
The headstrong Jades of Thrace Alcides tamed,
That King Aegeus fed with human flesh
And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
Were not subdued with valor more divine
Than you by this unconquered arm of mine.
To make you fierce and fit my appetite,
You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood
And drink in pails the strongest Muscadel.
If you can live with it, then live, and draw
My chariot swifter than the racking clouds;
If not, then die like beasts, and fit for nought
But perches for the black and fatal Ravens.
Thus am I right the Scourge of highest Jove,
And see the figure of my dignity,
By which I hold my name and majesty!
Let me have coach, my Lord, that I may ride,
And thus be drawn by these two idle kings.
Thy youth forbids such ease, my kingly boy.
They shall tomorrow draw my chariot,
While these their fellow kings may be refreshed.
O thou that sway'st the region under earth
And art a king as absolute as Jove,
Come as thou didst in fruitful Sicily,
Surveying all the glories of the land,
And as thou took'st the fair Proserpina,
Joying the fruit of Ceres' garden-plot,
For love, for honor, and to make her Queen,
So, for just hate, for shame, and to subdue
This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
Come once in fury and survey his pride,
Haling him headlong to the lowest hell.
Your Majesty must get some bits for these,
To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
That, like unruly never broken Jades,
Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths
And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.
Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths,
And pull their kicking colts out of their pastures.
Your Majesty already hath devised
A mean, as fit as may be, to restrain
These coltish coach horse tongues from blasphemy.
How like you that, sir king? why speak you not?
Ah, cruel Brat, sprung from a tyrant's loins!
How like his cursed father he begins
To practice taunts and bitter tyrannies!
Ay, Turk, I tell thee, this same Boy is he
That must (advanced in higher pomp than this)
Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave unsacked,
If Jove, esteeming me too good for earth,
Raise me to match the fair Aldeboran,
Above the threefold Astracism of heaven,
Before I conquer all the triple world.
Now fetch me out the Turkish Concubines.
I will prefer them for the funeral
They have bestowed on my abortive son.
Where are my common soldiers now, that fought
So Lionlike upon Asphaltis' plains?
Hold ye, tall soldiers, take ye Queens apiece -
I mean such Queens as were kings' Concubines.
Take them; divide them, and their jewels too,
And let them equally serve all your turns.
Brawl not, I warn you, for your lechery,
For every man that so offends shall die.
Injurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame
The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
To exercise upon such guiltless Dames
The violence of thy common Soldiers' lust?
Live continent, then, ye slaves, and meet not me
With troops of harlots at your slothful heels.
O pity us, my Lord, and save our honors.
Are ye not gone, ye villains, with your spoils?
O, merciless, infernal cruelty!
Save your honors! 'twere but time indeed,
Lost long before you knew what honor meant.
It seems they meant to conquer us, my Lord,
And make us jesting Pageants for their Trulls.
And now themselves shall make our Pageant,
And common soldiers jest with all their Trulls.
Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
Till we prepare our march to Babylon,
Whither we next make expedition.
Let us not be idle, then, my Lord,
But presently be prest to conquer it.
We will, Techelles. forward, then, ye Jades.
Now crouch, ye kings of greatest Asia,
And tremble when ye hear this Scourge will come
That whips down cities and controlleth crowns,
Adding their wealth and treasure to my store.
The Euxine sea, North to Natolia,
The Terrene, west; the Caspian, north northeast,
And on the south, Sinus Arabicus,
Shall all be loaden with the martial spoils
We will convey with us to Persia.
Then shall my native city Samarcanda,
And crystal waves of fresh Jaertis' stream,
The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
Be famous through the furthest continents;
For there my Palace royal shall be placed,
Whose shining Turrets shall dismay the heavens
And cast the fame of Ilion's Tower to hell.
Through the streets, with troops of conquered kings,
I'll ride in golden armor like the Sun,
And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
Spangled with Diamonds, dancing in the air,
To note me Emperor of the threefold world;
Like to an almond tree y-mounted high
Upon the lofty and celestial mount
Of evergreen Selinus, quaintly decked
With blooms more white than Erycina's brows,
Whose tender blossoms tremble every one
At every little breath that through heaven is blown.
Then in my coach, like Saturn's royal son
Mounted his shining chariot gilt with fire,
And drawn with princely Eagles through the path
Paved with bright Crystal and enchased with stars,
When all the Gods stand gazing at his pomp,
So will I ride through Samarcanda streets,
Until my soul, dissevered from this flesh,
Shall mount the milk-white way, and meet him there.
To Babylon, my Lords, to Babylon! 
My Lord, the breach the enemy hath made
Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
That little hope is left to save our lives
Or hold our city from the Conqueror's hands.
Then hang out flags, my Lord, of humble truce,
And satisfy the people's general prayers,
That Tamburlaine's intolerable wrath
May be suppressed by our submission.
Villain, respect'st thou more thy slavish life
Than honor of thy country or thy name?
Is not my life and state as dear to me,
The city and my native country's weal,
As any thing of price with thy conceit?
Have we not hope, for all our battered walls,
To live secure and keep his forces out,
When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
Makes walls afresh with everything that falls
Into the liquid substance of his stream,
More strong than are the gates of death or hell?
What faintness should dismay our courages,
When we are thus defensed against our Foe,
And have no terror but his threatening looks?
My Lord, if ever you did deed of ruth,
And now will work a refuge to our lives,
Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
That Tamburlaine may pity our distress
And use us like a loving Conqueror.
Though this be held his last day's dreadful siege,
Wherein he spareth neither man nor child,
Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
Whose state he ever pitied and relieved,
Will get his pardon, if your grace would send.
And this eternized city Babylon
Filled with a pack of faintheart Fugitives
That thus entreat their shame and servitude!
My lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
Yield up the town, and save our wives and children;
For I will cast myself from off these walls
Or die some death of quickest violence,
Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.
Villains, cowards, Traitors to our state,
Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of Hell,
That legions of tormenting spirits may vex
Your slavish bosoms with continual pains!
I care not, nor the town will never yield
As long as any life is in my breast.
Thou desperate Governor of Babylon,
To save thy life, and us a little labor,
Yield speedily the city to our hands,
Or else be sure thou shalt be forced with pains
More exquisite than ever Traitor felt.
Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
And will defend it in despite of thee.
Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.
Yield, foolish Governor; we offer more
Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves
As durst resist us till our third day's siege.
Thou seest us prest to give the last assault,
And that shall bide no more regard of parley.
Assault and spare not; we will never yield.
The stately buildings of fair Babylon,
Whose lofty pillars, higher than the clouds,
Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep,
Being carried thither by the cannon's force,
Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltis' lake
And make a bridge unto the battered walls.
Where Belus, Ninus, and great Alexander
Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
Whose chariot wheels have burst th' Assyrians' bones,
Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses.
Now in the place where fair Semiramis,
Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
Hath trod the Measures, do my soldiers march,
And in the streets, where brave Assyrian Dames
Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
With furious words and frowning visages
My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
The sturdy Governor of Babylon,
That made us all the labor for the town
And used such slender reck'ning of your majesty.
Go, bind the villain; he shall hang in chains
Upon the ruins of this conquered town.
Sirrah, the view of our vermilion tents
(Which threatened more than if the region
Next underneath the Element of fire
Were full of Comets and of blazing stars,
Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth)
Could not affright you; no, nor I myself,
The wrathful messenger of mighty Jove,
That with his sword hath quailed all earthly kings,
Could not persuade you to submission,
But still the ports were shut. villain, I say,
Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
The triple headed Cerberus would howl
And make black Jove to crouch and kneel to me;
But I have sent volleys of shot to you,
Yet could not enter till the breach was made.
Nor if my body could have stopped the breach,
Shouldst thou have entered, cruel Tamburlaine.
'Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
Nor yet thyself, the anger of the highest,
For though thy cannon shook the city walls,
My heart did never quake or courage faint.
Well, now I'll make it quake. go, draw him up;
Hang him in chains upon the city walls,
And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.
Vile monster, born of some infernal hag,
And sent from hell to tyrannize on earth,
Do all thy worst; nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
Torture, or pain, can daunt my dreadless mind.
Up with him, then; his body shall be scarred.
But, Tamburlaine, in Limnasphaltis' lake
There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
Which, when the city was besieged, I hid.
Save but my life, and I will give it thee.
Then, for all your valor, you would save your life?
Under a hollow bank, right opposite
Against the Western gate of Babylon.
Go thither, some of you, and take his gold.
The rest forward with execution.
Away with him hence; let him speak no more.
I think I make your courage something quail.
When this is done, we'll march from Babylon
And make our greatest haste to Persia.
These Jades are broken winded and half tired;
Unharness them, and let me have fresh horse.
So; now their best is done to honor me,
Take them and hang them both up presently.
Vile Tyrant! barbarous bloody Tamburlaine!
Take them away, Theridamas; see them dispatched.
Come, Asian Viceroys, to your tasks a while,
And take such fortune as your fellows felt.
First let thy Scythian horse tear both our limbs,
Rather than we should draw thy chariot,
And, like base slaves, abject our princely minds
To vile and ignominious servitude.
Rather lend me thy weapon, Tamburlaine,
That I may sheathe it in this breast of mine.
A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
More than the thought of this doth vex our souls.
They will talk still, my Lord, if you do not
Bridle them, and let me to my coach.
See, now, my Lord, how brave the Captain hangs.
'tis brave indeed my boy. well done!
Shoot first, my Lord, and then the rest shall follow.
Then have at him, to begin withal.
Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
The mortal fury of great Tamburlaine.
No, though Asphaltis' lake were liquid gold,
And offered me as ransom for thy life,
Yet shouldst thou die. shoot at him all at once.
So, now he hangs like Bagdad's Governor,
Having as many bullets in his flesh
As there be breaches in her battered wall.
Go now, and bind the Burghers hand and foot,
And cast them headlong in the city's lake.
Tartars and Persians shall inhabit there;
And, to command the city, I will build
Which hath been subject to the Persian king,
Shall pay me tribute for in Babylon.
Techelles, drown them all, man, woman, and child;
Leave not a Babylonian in the town.
I will about it straight. come, Soldiers. 
Now, Casane, where's the Turkish Alcoran
And all the heaps of superstitious books
Found in the Temples of that Mahomet
Whom I have thought a God? they shall be burnt.
Well said; let there be a fire presently.
In vain, I see, men worship Mahomet.
My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell,
Slew all his Priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
And yet I live untouched by Mahomet.
There is a God, full of revenging wrath,
From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
Whose Scourge I am, and him will I obey.
So, Casane; fling them in the fire.
Now, Mahomet, if thou have any power,
Come down thyself and work a miracle.
Thou art not worthy to be worshipped
That suffers flames of fire to burn the writ
Wherein the sum of thy religion rests.
Why send'st thou not a furious whirlwind down
To blow thy Alcoran up to thy throne,
Where men report thou sit'st by God himself?
Or vengeance on the head of Tamburlaine
That shakes his sword against thy majesty
And spurns the Abstracts of thy foolish laws?
Well, soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell;
He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlaine.
Seek out another Godhead to adore -
The God that sits in heaven, if any God,
For he is God alone, and none but he.
I have fulfilled your highness' will, my Lord.
Thousands of men, drowned in Asphaltis' Lake,
Have made the water swell above the banks,
And fishes, fed by human carcasses,
Amazed, swim up and down upon the waves,
As when they swallow Asafoetida,
Which makes them fleet aloft and gasp for air.
Well, then, my friendly Lords, what now remains,
But that we leave sufficient garrison
And presently depart to Persia,
To triumph after all our victories?
Ay, good my lord, let us in haste to Persia;
And let this Captain be removed the walls
To some high hill about the city here.
Let it be so; about it, soldiers.
But stay; I feel myself distempered suddenly.
What is it dares distemper Tamburlaine?
Something, Techelles; but I know not what.
But, forth, ye vassals! whatsoe'er it be,
Sickness or death can never conquer me. 
King of Amasia, now our mighty host
Marcheth in Asia major, where the streams
Of Euphrates and Tigris swiftly run;
And here may we behold great Babylon,
Circled about with Limnasphaltis' lake,
Where Tamburlaine with all his army lies,
Which being faint and weary with the siege,
We may lie ready to encounter him
Before his host be full from Babylon,
And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
If God or Mahomet send any aid.
Doubt not, my lord, but we shall conquer him.
The Monster that hath drunk a sea of blood
And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell;
And that vile Carcass, drawn by warlike kings,
The Fowls shall eat; for never sepulchre
Shall grace this base-born Tyrant Tamburlaine.
When I record my Parents' slavish life,
Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
My Viceroys' bondage under Tamburlaine,
Methinks I could sustain a thousand deaths
To be revenged of all his Villainy.
Ah, sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seen
Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sacked and burnt,
And but one host is left to honor thee,
Aid thy obedient servant Callapine,
And make him, after all these overthrows,
To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine.
Fear not, my Lord. I see great Mahomet,
Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
A Chaplet brighter than Apollo's crown,
Marching about the air with armed men,
To join with you against this Tamburlaine.
Renowned General, mighty Callapine,
Though God himself and holy Mahomet
Should come in person to resist your power,
Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees
To sue for mercy at your highness' feet.
Captain, the force of Tamburlaine is great,
His fortune greater, and the victories
Wherewith he hath so sore dismayed the world
Are greatest to discourage all our drifts;
Yet when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
She wanes again, and so shall his, I hope;
For we have here the chief selected men
Of twenty several kingdoms at the least.
Nor plowman, Priest, nor Merchant, stays at home;
All Turkey is in arms with Callapine;
And never will we sunder camps and arms
Before himself or his be conquered.
This is the time that must eternize me
For conquering the Tyrant of the world.
Come, Soldiers, let us lie in wait for him,
And if we find him absent from his camp,
Or that it be rejoined again at full,
Assail it and be sure of victory. 
Weep, heavens, and vanish into liquid tears!
Fall, stars that govern his nativity,
And summon all the shining lamps of heaven
To cast their bootless fires to the earth
And shed their feeble influence in the air.
Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds,
For hell and darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
And Death, with armies of Cimmerian spirits,
Gives battle 'gainst the heart of Tamburlaine.
Now in defiance of that wonted love
Your sacred virtues poured upon his throne,
And made his state an honor to the heavens,
These cowards invisibly assail his soul
And threaten conquest on our Sovereign.
But if he die, your glories are disgraced,
Earth droops and says that hell in heaven is placed.
O, then, ye Powers that sway eternal seats
And guide this massy substance of the earth,
If you retain desert of holiness,
As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
Be not inconstant, careless of your fame,
Bear not the burden of your enemies' joys,
Triumphing in his fall whom you advanced,
But as his birth, life, health, and majesty
Were strangely blest and governed by heaven,
So honor, heaven (till heaven dissolved be,)
His birth, his life, his health, and majesty!
Blush, heaven, to lose the honor of thy name,
To see thy footstool set upon thy head;
And let no baseness in thy haughty breast
Sustain a shame of such inexcellence,
To see the devils mount in Angels' thrones,
And Angels dive into the pools of hell.
And though they think their painful date is out
And that their power is puissant as Jove's,
Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlaine,
(Thy instrument and note of Majesty)
Is greater far than they can thus subdue;
For, if he die, thy glory is disgraced,
Earth droops and says that hell in heaven is placed.
What daring God torments my body thus
And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine?
Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
That have been termed the terror of the world?
Techelles and the rest, come, take your swords,
And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul.
Come, let us march against the powers of heaven
And set black streamers in the firmament
To signify the slaughter of the Gods.
Ah, friends, what shall I do? I cannot stand,
Come, carry me to war against the Gods,
That thus envy the health of Tamburlaine.
Ah, good my Lord, leave these impatient words
Which add much danger to your malady.
Why, shall I sit and languish in this pain?
No, strike the drums, and, in revenge of this,
Come, let us charge our spears, and pierce his breast
Whose shoulders bear the Axis of the world,
That if I perish, heaven and earth may fade.
Theridamas, haste to the court of Jove;
Will him to send Apollo hither straight
To cure me, or I'll fetch him down myself.
Sit still, my gracious Lord; this grief will cease
And cannot last, it is so violent.
Not last, Techelles? no, for I shall die.
See where my slave, the ugly monster death,
Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
Who flies away at every glance I give,
And when I look away, comes stealing on.
Villain, away, and hie thee to the field!
I and mine army come to load thy bark
With souls of thousand mangled carcasses.
Look, where he goes! but see, he comes again
Because I stay. Techelles, let us march
And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.
Pleaseth your Majesty to drink this potion,
Which will abate the fury of your fit
And cause some milder spirits govern you.
Tell me, what think you of my sickness now?
I viewed your urine, and the hypostasis,
Thick and obscure, doth make your danger great.
Your veins are full of accidental heat,
Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried.
The Humidum and Calor, which some hold
Is not a parcel of the Elements,
But of a substance more divine and pure,
Is almost clean extinguished and spent,
Which, being the cause of life, imports your death.
Besides, my Lord, this day is Critical,
Dangerous to those whose Crisis is as yours.
Your Arteries, which alongst the veins convey
The lively spirits which the heart engenders,
Are parched and void of spirit, that the soul,
Wanting those Organons by which it moves,
Cannot endure, by argument of art.
Yet, if your majesty may escape this day,
No doubt but you shall soon recover all.
Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
And live, in spite of death, above a day.
See, my Physicians, now, how Jove hath sent
A present medicine to recure my pain.
My looks shall make them fly; and might I follow,
There should not one of all the villains's power
Live to give offer of another fight.
I joy, my Lord, your highness is so strong,
That can endure so well your royal presence,
Which only will dismay the enemy.
I know it will, Casane. draw, you slaves!
In spite of death, I will go show my face.
Thus are the villains, cowards fled for fear,
Like Summer's vapors vanished by the Sun;
And could I but a while pursue the field,
That Callapine should be my slave again.
But I perceive my martial strength is spent.
In vain I strive and rail against those powers
That mean t' invest me in a higher throne,
As much too high for this disdainful earth.
Give me a Map; then let me see how much
Is left for me to conquer all the world,
That these, my boys, may finish all my wants.
Here I began to march towards Persia,
Along Armenia and the Caspian sea,
And thence unto Bithynia, where I took
The Turk and his great Empress prisoners.
Then marched I into Egypt and Arabia;
And here, not far from Alexandria,
Whereas the Terrene and the red sea meet,
Being distant less than full a hundred leagues,
I meant to cut a channel to them both,
That men might quickly sail to India.
From thence to Nubia near Borno Lake,
And so along the Ethiopian sea,
Cutting the Tropic line of Capricorn,
I conquered all as far as Zanzibar.
Then, by the Northern part of Africa,
I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
To Asia, where I stay against my will;
Which is from Scythia, where I first began,
Backward and forwards near five thousand leagues.
Look here, my boys; see, what a world of ground
Lies westward from the midst of Cancer's line
Unto the rising of this earthly globe,
Whereas the Sun, declining from our sight,
Begins the day with our Antipodes.
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Lo, here, my sons, are all the golden Mines,
Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
More worth than Asia and the world beside;
And from th' Antarctic Pole Eastward behold
As much more land, which never was descried,
Wherein are rocks of Pearl that shine as bright
As all the Lamps that beautify the Sky.
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Here, lovely boys; what death forbids my life,
That let your lives command in spite of death.
Alas, my Lord, how should our bleeding hearts,
Wounded and broken with your Highness' grief,
Retain a thought of joy or spark of life?
Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects,
Whose matter is incorporate in your flesh.
Your pains do pierce our souls; no hope survives,
For by your life we entertain our lives.
But, sons, this subject, not of force enough
To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
Must part, imparting his impressions
By equal portions into both your breasts.
My flesh, divided in your precious shapes,
Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
And live in all your seeds immortally.
Then now remove me, that I may resign
My place and proper title to my son.
First, take my Scourge and my imperial Crown,
And mount my royal chariot of estate,
That I may see thee crowned before I die.
Help me, my Lords, to make my last remove.
A woeful change, my Lord, that daunts our thoughts
More than the ruin of our proper souls.
Sit up, my son, let me see how well
Thou wilt become thy father's majesty.
With what a flinty bosom should I joy
The breath of life and burden of my soul,
If not resolved into resolved pains,
My body's mortified lineaments
Should exercise the motions of my heart,
Pierced with the joy of any dignity!
O father, if the unrelenting ears
Of death and hell be shut against my prayers,
And that the spiteful influence of heaven
Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
How should I step or stir my hateful feet
Against the inward powers of my heart,
Leading a life that only strives to die,
And plead in vain unpleasing sovereignty?
Let not thy love exceed thine honor, son,
Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity
That nobly must admit necessity.
Sit up, my boy, and with these silken reins
Bridle the steeled stomachs of those jades.
My Lord, you must obey his majesty,
Since Fate commands and proud necessity.
Heavens witness me with what a broken heart
And damned spirit I ascend this seat,
And send my soul, before my father die,
His anguish and his burning agony!
Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate.
Let it be placed by this my fatal chair,
And serve as parcel of my funeral.
Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
Nor may our hearts, all drowned in tears of blood,
Joy any hope of your recovery?
Casane, no. the Monarch of the earth,
And eyeless Monster that torments my soul,
Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
And therefore still augments his cruelty.
Then let some God oppose his holy power
Against the wrath and tyranny of death,
That his tear-thirsty and unquenched hate
May be upon himself reverberate!
Now, eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
And when my soul hath virtue of your sight,
Pierce through the coffin and the sheet of gold,
And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
So, reign, my son; scourge and control those slaves,
Guiding thy chariot with thy Father's hand.
As precious is the charge thou undertak'st
As that which Clymene's brainsick son did guide,
When wandering Phoebe's Ivory cheeks were scorched,
And all the earth, like Aetna, breathing fire.
Be warned by him, then learn with awful eye
To sway a throne as dangerous as his;
For if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
As pure and fiery as Phyteus' beams,
The nature of these proud rebelling Jades
Will take occasion by the slenderest hair
And draw thee piecemeal, like Hippolytus,
Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliffs.
The nature of thy chariot will not bear
A guide of baser temper than myself,
More than heaven's coach the pride of Phaeton.
Farewell, my boys! my dearest friends, farewell!
My body feels, my soul doth weep to see
Your sweet desires deprived my company,
For Tamburlaine, the Scourge of God, must die.
Meet heaven and earth, and here let all things end,
For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit,
And heaven consumed his choicest living fire.
Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore,
For both their worths will equal him no more.
<DF04VS> Not marching now in fields of Trasimene 
Where Mars did mate the Carthaginians, 
Nor sporting in the dalliance of love
In courts of kings where state is overturned,
Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds,	 
Intends our muse to daunt his heavenly verse.
Only this, gentlemen: we must perform
The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad.
To patient judgments we appeal our plaud,
And speak for Faustus in his infancy.
Now is he born, his parents base of stock,
In Germany, within a town called Rhode.
Of riper years to Wittenberg he went,
Whereas his kinsmen chiefly brought him up.
So soon he profits in divinity,	
The fruitful plot of scholarism graced,
That shortly he was graced with doctor's name,
Excelling all whose sweet delight disputes
In heavenly matters of theology;
Till, swoll'n with cunning of a self-conceit,
His waxen wings did mount above his reach, 
And melting heavens conspired his overthrow.
For, falling to a devilish exercise,
And glutted more with learning's golden gifts, 
He surfeits upon cursed necromancy;
Nothing so sweet as magic is to him,
Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss.
And this the man that in his study sits.	
Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin
To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess.
Having commenced, be a divine in show,
Yet level at the end of every art,
And live and die in Aristotle's works.
Sweet Analytics, 'tis thou hast ravished me!
Bene disserere est finis logices.
Is to dispute well logic's chiefest end?
Affords this art no greater miracle?
Then read no more; thou hast attained the end.
A greater subject fitteth Faustus' wit.
Bid On kai me on farewell. Galen, come!
Be a physician, Faustus. Heap up gold,
And be eternized for some wondrous cure.
Summum bonum medicinae sanitas:
The end of physic is our body's health.
Why Faustus, hast thou not attained that end? 
Is not thy common talk sound aphorisms?
Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,
Whereby whole cities have escaped the plague
And thousand desp'rate maladies been eased? 
Yet art thou still but Faustus, and a man. 
Wouldst thou make man to live eternally?
Or, being dead, raise them to life again?	
Then this profession were to be esteemed.
Physic, farewell! Where is Justinian?
Si una eademque res legatur duobus, 
Alter rem, alter valorem rei, etc.
A pretty case of paltry legacies!	
Such is the subject of the Institute
And universal body of the Church.
His study fits a mercenary drudge
Who aims at nothing but external trash	
Too servile and illiberal for me.
When all is done, divinity is best.
Jerome's Bible, Faustus, view it well.
Si peccasse negamus, fallimur
Et nulla est in nobis veritas.
If we say that we have no sin,
We deceive ourselves, and there's no truth in us.	
Ay, we must die an everlasting death.
What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,
What will be, shall be? Divinity, adieu!	
These metaphysics of magicians
And necromantic books are heavenly,
Lines, circles, signs, letters, and characters 
Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.
O, what a world of profit and delight,	
Of power, of honor, of omnipotence,
Is promised to the studious artisan!
All things that move between the quiet poles
Shall be at my command. Emperors and kings
Are but obeyed in their several provinces,
Nor can they raise the wind or rend the clouds;
But his dominion that exceeds in this
Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man.
A sound magician is a mighty god.
Here, Faustus, try thy brains to gain a deity.
Wagner! Commend me to my dearest friends,
The German Valdes and Cornelius.
Request them earnestly to visit me.
Their conference will be a greater help to me	 
Than all my labors, plod I ne'er so fast.
O Faustus, lay that damned book aside
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul
And heap God's heavy wrath upon thy head!
Read, read the Scriptures. That is blasphemy.	
Go forward, Faustus, in that famous art
Wherein all nature's treasury is contained.
Be thou on earth as Jove is in the sky,
Lord and commander of these elements.
How am I glutted with conceit of this!	
Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,
Resolve me of all ambiguities,
Perform what desperate enterprise I will?
I'll have them fly to India for gold,
Ransack the ocean for orient pearl,	
And search all corners of the new-found world
For pleasant fruits and princely delicates.
I'll have them read me strange philosophy
And tell the secrets of all foreign kings.
I'll have them wall all Germany with brass
And make swift Rhine circle fair Wittenberg.
I'll have them fill the public schools with silk,
I'll levy soldiers with the coin they bring
And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,
And reign sole king of all our provinces;
Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war
Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp's bridge
I'll make my servile spirits to invent.
Come, German Valdes and Cornelius,	
And make me blest with your sage conference!
Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,
Know that your words have won me at the last
To practice magic and concealed arts.
Yet not your words only, but mine own fantasy,
That will receive no object, for my head
But ruminates on necromantic skill.
Philosophy is odious and obscure;
Both law and physic arc for petty wits;
Divinity is basest of the three,	
Unpleasant, harsh, contemptible, and vile.
'Tis magic, magic that hath ravished me.
Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt,
And I, that have with concise syllogisms
Gravelled the pastors of the German Church
And made the flow'ring pride of Wittenberg
Swarm to my problems as the infernal spirits
On sweet Musaeus when he came to hell,
Will be as cunning as Agrippa was,
Whose shadows made all Europe honor him.	
Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience 
Shall make all nations to canonize us.
As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords,
So shall the subjects of every element
Be always serviceable to us three.	
Like lions shall they guard us when we please,
Like Almaine rutters with their horsemen's staves,
Or Lapland giants, trotting by our sides;
Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,
Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows
Than in the white breasts of the Queen of Love.
From Venice shall they drag huge argosies,
And from America the golden fleece
That yearly stuffs old Philip's treasury,
If learned Faustus will be resolute.	
Valdes, as resolute am I in this
As thou to live. Therefore object it not.
The miracles that magic will perform
Will make thee vow to study nothing else.
He that is grounded in astrology,	
Enriched with tongues, well seen in minerals,
Hath all the principles magic doth require.
Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowned
And more frequented for this mystery
Than heretofore the Delphian oracle.
The spirits tell me they can dry the sea
And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks 
Ay, all the wealth that our forefathers hid
Within the massy entrails of the earth.
Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?	
Nothing, Cornelius. O, this cheers my soul!
Come, show me some demonstrations magical,
That I may conjure in some lusty grove
And have these joys in full possession.
Then haste thee to some solitary grove,
And bear wise Bacon's and Albanus' works,
The Hebrew Psalter, and New Testament;
And whatsoever else is requisite
We will inform thee ere our conference cease.
Valdes, first let him know the words of art,	
And then, all other ceremonies learned,
Faustus may try his cunning by himself.
First I'll instruct thee in the rudiments,
And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.
Then come and dine with me, and after meat
We'll canvass every quiddity thereof, 
For ere I sleep I'll try what I can do. 
This night I'll conjure, though I die therefore. 
That shall we know, for see, here comes his boy.
O, but I fear me nothing can reclaim him.
Now that the gloomy shadow of the earth, 
Longing to view Orion's drizzling look,
Leaps from th' Antarctic world unto the sky 
And dims the welkin with her pitchy breath,
Faustus, begin thine incantations,	
And try if devils will obey thy hest,
Seeing thou hast prayed and sacrificed to them.
Within this circle is Jehovah's name,
Forward and backward anagrammatised,
The breviated names of holy saints,	
Figures of every adjunct to the heavens,
And characters of signs and erring stars,
By which the spirits are enforced to rise.
Then fear not, Faustus, but be resolute,
And try the uttermost magic can perform.	
I charge thee to return and change thy shape.
Thou art too ugly to attend on me.	
Go, and return an old Franciscan friar;
That holy shape becomes a devil best.
I see there's virtue in my heavenly words.
Who would not be proficient in this art?
How pliant is this Mephistopheles,	
Full of obedience and humility!
Such is the force of magic and my spells.
Now, Faustus, thou art conjurer laureate,
That canst command great Mephistopheles.
	
I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
To do whatever Faustus shall command,
Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere
Or the ocean to overwhelm the world.	
I am a servant to great Lucifer
And may not follow thee without his leave.
No more than he commands must we perform.
Did not he charge thee to appear to me?
No, I came now hither of mine own accord.	
Did not my conjuring speeches raise thee? Speak.
That was the cause, but yet per accidens.
For when we hear one rack the name of God,
Abjure the Scriptures and his Saviour Christ,
We fly in hope to get his glorious soul,	
Nor will we come unless he use such means
Whereby he is in danger to be damned.
Therefore, the shortest cut for conjuring
Is stoutly to abjure the Trinity
And pray devoutly to the prince of hell.	
Already done, and holds this principle:
There is no chief but only Beelzebub,
To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.
This word 'damnation' terrifies not him,
For he confounds hell in Elysium.
His ghost be with the old philosophers!
But leaving these vain trifles of men's souls,
Tell me what is that Lucifer thy lord?
Arch-regent and commander of all spirits.	
Was not that Lucifer an angel once?
Yes, Faustus, and most dearly loved of God. 
How comes it then that he is prince of devils? 
O, by aspiring pride and insolence,
For which God threw him from the face of heaven.	
And what are you that live with Lucifer?
Unhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer,
Conspired against our God with Lucifer,
And are for ever damned with Lucifer.
How comes it then that thou art out of hell? 
Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it.
Think'st thou that I, who saw the face of God
And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells
In being deprived of everlasting bliss?
O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
Which strike a terror to my fainting soul!
What, is great Mephistopheles so passionate	
For being deprived of the joys of heaven?
Learn thou of Faustus' manly fortitude,
And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.
Go bear these tidings to great Lucifer:
Seeing Faustus hath incurred eternal death 
By desp'rate thoughts against Jove's deity,
Say he surrenders up to him his soul,
So he will spare him four-and-twenty years,
Letting him live in all voluptuousness,
Having thee ever to attend on me,
To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
To tell me whatsoever I demand,
To slay mine enemies and aid my friends,
And always be obedient to my will.
Go and return to mighty Lucifer,
And meet me in my study at midnight,
And then resolve me of thy master's mind. 
Had I as many souls as there be stars, 
I'd give them all for Mephistopheles.
By him I'll be great emperor of the world
To pass the ocean with a band of men;
I'll join the hills that bind the Afric shore
And both contributory to my crown.
The Emp'ror shall not live but by my leave, 
Nor any potentate of Germany.
Now that I have obtained what I desire,
I'll live in speculation of this art
Till Mephistopheles return again.
Tell me, sirrah, hast thou any comings in?	
Ay, and goings out too, you may see else.
Qui mihi discipulus? How, in verse?
No, sirrah, in beaten silk and stavesacre.
No, no, here, take your gridirons again.	
Truly, I'll none of them. Truly, but you shall.
What boots it then to think of God or heaven?
Away with such vain fancies and despair!
Despair in God and trust in Beelzebub.	
Now go not backward. No, Faustus, be resolute.
Ay, and Faustus will turn to God again.
The god thou servest is thine own appetite,
Wherein is fixed the love of Beelzebub.
To him I'll build an altar and a church,
And offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.
Sweet Faustus, leave that execrable art.	
Contrition, prayer, repentance   what of them?
O, they are means to bring thee unto heaven. 
Rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,
Sweet Faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.	
Why, the seigniory of Emden shall be mine.
When Mephistopheles shall stand by me,
What god can hurt thee, Faustus? Thou art safe;
Cast no more doubts. Come, Mephistopheles,
And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer.
Is't not midnight? Come, Mephistopheles!
Now tell, what says Lucifer thy lord?	
That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he lives, 
So he will buy my service with his soul.
Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee.
But, Faustus, thou must bequeath it solemnly
And write a deed of gift with thine own blood,	 
For that security craves great Lucifer.
If thou deny it, I will back to hell.
	
Have you any pain, that tortures others?
As great as have the human souls of men.
But tell me, Faustus, shall I have thy soul?	 
And I will be thy slave, and wait on thee,
And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.
Ay, Mephistopheles, I give it thee.
And bind thy soul that at some certain day	
Great Lucifer may claim it as his own,
And then be thou as great as Lucifer.
Lo, Mephistopheles, for love of thee
I cut mine arm, and with my proper blood
Chief lord and regent of perpetual night.
View here the blood that trickles from mine arm,
And let it be propitious for my wish.
Ay, so I will. But Mephistopheles,
My blood congeals, and I can write no more.
Is it unwilling I should write this bill?	
Why streams it not, that I may write afresh?
'Faustus gives to thee his soul'   ah, there it stayed!
Why shouldst thou not? Is not thy soul thine own?
Then write again: 'Faustus gives to thee his soul.'
So; now the blood begins to clear again,
Now will I make an end immediately. 
O, what will not I do to obtain his soul?
Consummatum est. This bill is ended,
And Faustus hath bequeathed his soul to Lucifer.
But what is this inscription on mine arm?
If unto God, he'll throw thee down to hell. 
My senses are deceived; here's nothing writ. 
I see it plain. Here in this place is writ	
'Homo, fuge!' Yet shall not Faustus fly.
I'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.	
Speak, Mephistopheles. What means this show? 
Nothing, Faustus, but to delight thy mind withal
And to show thee what magic can perform.	
But may I raise up spirits when I please?
Ay, Faustus, and do greater things than these. 
Here, Mephistopheles, receive this scroll,
A deed of gift of body and of soul 	
But yet conditionally that thou perform
All articles prescribed between us both.
Faustus, I swear by hell and Lucifer
To effect all promises between us made.
Speak, Faustus. Do you deliver this as your deed?	 
Ay. Take it, and the devil give thee good on't.
First will I question with thee about hell.
Tell me, where is the place that men call hell?	
Under the heavens. Ay, but whereabout?
Within the bowels of these elements, 
Where we are tortured and remain for ever. 
Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscribed
In one self place, for where we are is hell,
And, to conclude, when all the world dissolves, 
And every creature shall be purified,
All places shall be hell that is not heaven.
Ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.
Why, think'st thou then that Faustus shall be damned? 
Ay, of necessity, for here's the scroll
Wherein thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.
Ay, and body too. But what of that?
Tush, these are trifles and mere old wives' tales. 
For I am damned and am now in hell.	 
Well, thou wilt have one. Sit there till I come. 
I'll fetch thee a wife, in the devil's name.	
Tut, Faustus, marriage is but a ceremonial toy. 
If thou lovest me, think no more of it.	
And bring them ev'ry morning to thy bed.
She whom thine eye shall like, thy heart shall have,
Be she as chaste as was Penelope,	
As wise as Saba, or as beautiful	
Hold, take this book. Peruse it thoroughly.
The iterating of these lines brings gold;
The framing of this circle on the ground
Brings whirlwinds, tempests, thunder, and lightning. 
Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,
And men in armor shall appear to thee,
Ready to execute what thou desir'st.
Here they are in this book.  There turn to them.
When I behold the heavens, then I repent 
And curse thee, wicked Mephistopheles,
Because thou hast deprived me of those joys.
Think'st thou heaven is such a glorious thing?	
I tell thee, 'tis not half so fair as thou
If it were made for man, 'twas made for me.	 
I will renounce this magic and repent.
Faustus, repent yet, God will pity thee.
Thou art a spirit. God cannot pity thee.
Who buzzeth in mine ears I am a spirit?
Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;	
Ay, God will pity me if I repent.
My heart's so hardened I cannot repent.
Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven
But fearful echoes thunder in mine ears:	
'Faustus, thou art damned!' Then swords and knives, 
Poison, guns, halters, and envenomed steel
Are laid before me to dispatch myself;
And long ere this I should have slain myself
Had not sweet pleasure conquered deep despair.
Have not I made blind Homer sing to me
Of Alexander's love and Oenone's death?
And hath not he that built the walls of Thebes
With ravishing sound of his melodious harp
Made music with my Mephistopheles?	
Why should I die, then, or basely despair?
I am resolved Faustus shall ne'er repent.
Come, Mephistopheles, let us dispute again
And argue of divine astrology.
Tell me, are there many heavens above the moon?
Are all celestial bodies but one globe,
As is the substance of this centric earth?
As are the elements, such are the spheres, 
Mutually folded in each others' orb;
And, Faustus, all jointly move upon one axletree,	
Whose terminine is termed the world's wide pole.
Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter
Tush, these slender trifles Wagner can decide.
Hath Mephistopheles no greater skill?	
Who knows not the double motion of the planets?
The first is finished in a natural day,
Tush, these are freshmen's suppositions. 
Well, I am answered. Tell me who made the world. 
I will not. Sweet Mephistopheles, tell me.
Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me anything?	 
Think, Faustus, upon God, that made the world. 
Ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell!	 
'Tis thou hast damned distressed Faustus' soul.
Never too late, if Faustus can repent.
If thou repent, devils shall tear thee in pieces.	
Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.
Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just.
There's none but I have int'rest in the same.	
O, who art thou that look'st so terrible?
And this is my companion prince in hell.
O Faustus, they are come to fetch away thy soul!
We come to tell thee thou dost injure us.	 
Thou talk'st of Christ, contrary to thy promise.
Thou shouldst not think of God. Think of the devil,
Nor will I henceforth. Pardon me in this,
And Faustus vows never to look to heaven,
Never to name God or to pray to him,
To burn his Scriptures, slay his ministers,
And make my spirits pull his churches down.
Do so, and we will highly gratify thee.
Talk of the devil, and nothing else. Come away!	
Tut, Faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.
Thou shalt. I will send for thee at midnight.
This will I keep as chary as my life.	
Farewell, Faustus, and think on the devil. 
Farewell, great Lucifer. Come, Mephistopheles.
To know the secrets of astronomy
Graven in the book of Jove's high firmament,
Did mount himself to scale Olympus' top,
Being seated in a chariot burning bright	
Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons' necks.
He now is gone to prove cosmography,
And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome
To see the Pope and manner of his court
And take some part of holy Peter's feast	
That to this day is highly solemnised.	
Having now, my good Mephistopheles,
Passed with delight the stately town of Trier,
Environed round with airy mountain-tops,
With walls of flint and deep intrenched lakes,
Not to be won by any conquering prince;	
From Paris next, coasting the realm of France,
We saw the river Maine fall into Rhine,
Whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines.
Then up to Naples, rich Campania,
Whose buildings, fair and gorgeous to the eye,
The streets straight forth and paved with finest brick, 
Quarters the town in four equivalents.
There saw we learned Maro's golden tomb,
The way he cut an English mile in length
Thorough a rock of stone in one night's space.
From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest,
In midst of which a sumptuous temple stands
That threats the stars with her aspiring top.
Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time.
But tell me now, what resting place is this?	
Conducted me within the walls of Rome?
I hope his Holiness will bid us welcome.
And now, my Faustus, that thou mayst perceive
What Rome containeth to delight thee with,	
Know that this city stands upon seven hills
That underprops the groundwork of the same.
Just through the midst runs flowing Tiber's stream,
With winding banks that cut it in two parts,
Over the which four stately bridges lean,	
That makes safe passage to each part of Rome.
Upon the bridge called Ponte Angelo
Erected is a castle passing strong,
Within whose walls such store of ordnance are,
And double cannons, framed of carved brass,	
As match the days within one complete year 
Besides the gates and high pyramides
Which Julius Caesar brought from Africa.
Now, by the kingdoms of infernal rule,
Of Styx, Acheron, and the fiery lake	
Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear
That I do long to see the monuments
And situation of bright splendent Rome.
Nay, Faustus, stay. I know you'd fain see the Pope
And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
Where thou shalt see a troupe of bald-pate friars
Whose summum bonum is in belly cheer.
Well, I am content to compass then some sport,
And by their folly make us merriment.	 
My lord of Lorraine, will't please you draw near?
Fall to, and the devil choke you an you spare.
How now, who's that which spake? Friars, look about. 
Here's nobody, if it like your Holiness.
	
	
What again?   My lord, I'll drink to your Grace. 
Come on, Mephistopheles. What shall we do?
How? Bell, book, and candle, candle, book, and bell, 
Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell.
Because it is Saint Peter's holy day.
Hush, I'll gull him supernaturally. 
Drawer, I hope all is paid. God be with you. 
I must say somewhat to your fellow you, sir.
Well, t' one of you hath this goblet about you.
Monarch of hell, under whose black survey
Great potentates do kneel with awful fear,	 
Upon whose altars thousand souls do lie,
How am I vexed with these villains' charms!
From Constantinople am I hither come
Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.
When Faustus had with pleasure ta'en the view
Of rarest things and royal courts of kings,
He stayed his course and so returned home,
Where such as bear his absence but with grief 
I mean his friends and nearest companions 
Did gratulate his safety with kind words.
And in their conference of what befell,
Touching his journey through the world and air,
They put forth questions of astrology,
Which Faustus answered with such learned skill	
As they admired and wondered at his wit.
Now is his fame spread forth in every land.
Amongst the rest the Emperor is one,
Carolus the Fifth, at whose palace now
Faustus is feasted 'mongst his noblemen.	
What there he did in trial of his art
I leave untold, your eyes shall see performed.	
Then, Doctor Faustus, mark what I shall say.
As I was sometime solitary set
Within my closet, sundry thoughts arose
About the honor of mine ancestors 
How they had won by prowess such exploits,
Got such riches, subdued so many kingdoms
As we that do succeed or they that shall
I fear me, never attain to that degree
Of high renown and great authority.
Amongst which kings is Alexander the Great,
Chief spectacle of the world's pre-eminence,
The bright shining of whose glorious acts
Lightens the world with his reflecting beams 
As when I hear but motion made of him,
It grieves my soul I never saw the man.
If, therefore, thou by cunning of thine art
Canst raise this man from hollow vaults below
Where lies entombed this famous conqueror,
And bring with him his beauteous paramour,
Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire
They used to wear during their time of life,	
Thou shalt both satisfy my just desire
And give me cause to praise thee whilst I live.
Nay, an you go to conjuring, I'll be gone.	
Thou damned wretch and execrable dog, 
Bred in the concave of some monstrous rock,
How dar'st thou thus abuse a gentleman?
Villain, I say, undo what thou hast done.
O, not so fast, sir. There's no haste but good.
Farewell, Master Doctor. Yet, ere you go,
Expect from me a bounteous reward.
Now, Mephistopheles, the restless course 	
That time doth run with calm and silent foot,
Short'ning my days and thread of vital life,
Calls for the payment of my latest years.
Therefore, sweet Mephistopheles, let us make haste
What, will you go on horseback or on foot? 
Nay, till I am past this fair and pleasant green,
Why, sir, will he not drink of all waters?
What art thou, Faustus, but a man condemned to die?
Thy fatal time doth draw to final end.	 
Despair doth drive distrust unto my thoughts.
Confound these passions with a quiet sleep. 
Tush! Christ did call the thief upon the cross; 
Then rest thee, Faustus, quiet in conceit.
Why, sir, what would you? You cannot speak with him.	 
Why, he's fast asleep. Come some other time.
I tell thee he has not slept this eight nights.	
Alas, I am undone! What shall I do?	 
I am glad they content you so, madam.
Where you must well reward this learned man
For the great kindness he hath showed to you.
And so I will, my lord, and whilst I live	
I think my master means to die shortly,
For he hath given to me all his goods.
And yet methinks if that death were near
He would not banquet and carouse and swill
Amongst the students, as even now he doth,	
Who are at supper with such belly-cheer
As Wagner ne'er beheld in all his life.
See where they come. Belike the feast is ended. 
For that I know your friendship is unfeigned,
And Faustus' custom is not to deny
The just requests of those that wish him well,	
You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece
No otherways for pomp and majesty
Than when Sir Paris crossed the seas with her
And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.
Be silent then, for danger is in words.	
Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,
Whom all the world admires for majesty.
No marvel though the angry Greeks pursued 
With ten years' war the rape of such a queen,
Whose heavenly beauty passeth all compare.	
Since we have seen the pride of nature's works 
And only paragon of excellence,
Let us depart; and for this glorious deed
Happy and blest be Faustus evermore.
Gentlemen, farewell. The same I wish to you.	
Ah, Doctor Faustus, that I might prevail
To guide thy steps unto the way of life,
By which sweet path thou mayst attain the goal
That shall conduct thee to celestial rest!
Break heart, drop blood, and mingle it with tears 
Tears falling from repentant heaviness
Of thy most vile and loathsome filthiness,
The stench whereof corrupts the inward soul
With such flagitious crimes of heinous sins
As no commiseration may expel	
But mercy, Faustus, of thy Saviour sweet,
Whose blood alone must wash away thy guilt.
Where art thou, Faustus? Wretch, what hast thou done? 
Damned art thou, Faustus, damned! Despair and die!
Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voice	 
Ah, stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps!
I see an angel hovers o'er thy head,
And with a vial full of precious grace	
Offers to pour the same into thy soul.
Then call for mercy and avoid despair.
Leave me a while to ponder on my sins	
I go, sweet Faustus, but with heavy cheer,
Fearing the ruin of thy hopeless soul.	
Accursed Faustus, where is mercy now?
I do repent, and yet I do despair.
Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast.	
What shall I do to shun the snares of death?
Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul
For disobedience to my sovereign lord.
Revolt, or I'll in piecemeal tear thy flesh.
Sweet Mephistopheles, entreat thy lord	
To pardon my unjust presumption,
And with my blood again I will confirm
My former vow I made to Lucifer.
Do it then quickly, with unfeigned heart,
Lest greater danger do attend thy drift.	
Torment, sweet friend, that base and crooked age
That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,
With greatest torments that our hell affords.
His faith is great. I cannot touch his soul.
But what I may afflict his body with
I will attempt, which is but little worth.
One thing, good servant, let me crave of thee
To glut the longing of my heart's desire:
That I might have unto my paramour
That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,	
Whose sweet embracings may extinguish clean
These thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,
And keep mine oath I made to Lucifer.
Faustus, this, or what else thou shalt desire,
Shall be performed in twinkling of an eye.
Was this the face that launched a thousand ships 
And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?
Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
Her lips sucks forth my soul. See where it flies!
Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.	
Here will I dwell, for heaven be in these lips,
And all is dross that is not Helena.
I will be Paris, and for love of thee
Instead of Troy shall Wittenberg be sacked,
And I will combat with weak Menelaus,	
And wear thy colors on my plumed crest.
Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel
And then return to Helen for a kiss.
O, thou art fairer than the evening air,
Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars.	
Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
When he appeared to hapless Semele,
More lovely than the monarch of the sky
In wanton Arethusa's azured arms;
And none but thou shalt be my paramour.	
Accursed Faustus, miserable man,
That from thy soul exclud'st the grace of heaven 
And fliest the throne of His tribunal seat!
Satan begins to sift me with his pride.
As in this furnace God shall try my faith,	
My faith, vile hell, shall triumph over thee
Ambitious fiends, see how the heavens smiles
At your repulse and laughs your state to scorn!
Hence, hell! For hence I fly unto my God.
Now hast thou but one bare hour to live,
And then thou must be damned perpetually.
Stand still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,
That time may cease and midnight never come!
Fair nature's eye, rise, rise again, and make	 
Perpetual day; or let this hour be but
A year, a month, a week, a natural day,
That Faustus may repent and save his soul!
O lente, lente currite noetis equi!
The stars move still; time runs; the clock will strike;	
The devil will come, and Faustus must be damned.
Where is it now? 'Tis gone; and see where God
Stretcheth out his arm and bends his ireful brows!
Mountains and hills, come, come and fall on me,
And hide me from the heavy wrath of God!	
Then will I headlong run into the earth.
Earth, gape! O, no, it will not harbor me.
You stars that reigned at my nativity,
Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,	
Now draw up Faustus like a foggy mist
Into the entrails of yon laboring cloud,
That when you vomit forth into the air,
My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
So that my soul may but ascend to heaven.	
If thou wilt not have mercy on my soul,
Yet for Christ's sake, whose blood hath ransomed me,	
Impose some end to my incessant pain.
Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
A hundred thousand, and at last be saved.
O, no end is limited to damned souls.
Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?	
Or why is this immortal that thou hast?
Ah, Pythagoras' metempsychosis, were that true,
This soul should fly from me and I be changed
Their souls are soon dissolved in elements;
But mine must live still to be plagued in hell.
Curst be the parents that engendered me!
No, Faustus, curse thyself. Curse Lucifer,
That hath deprived thee of the joys of heaven.	
O, it strikes, it strikes! Now, body, turn to air,
Or Lucifer will bear thee quick to hell.
O soul, be changed into little waterdrops,
And fall into the ocean, ne'er be found!
My God, my God, look not so fierce on me!	
Adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!
Ugly hell, gape not. Come not, Lucifer!
I'll burn my books. Ah, Mephistopheles!
Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight, 
And burned is Apollo's laurel bough
That sometime grew within this learned man.
Faustus is gone. Regard his hellish fall,
Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise	
Only to wonder at unlawful things,
Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits
To practice more than heavenly power permits.	
<JEWMvs>
Albeit the world think Machiavel is dead, 
Yet was his soul but flown beyond the Alps; 
And, now the Guise is dead, is come from France, 
To view this Land, and frolic with his friends. 
To some perhaps my name is odious; 
But such as love me guard me from their tongues, 
And let them know that I am Machiavel, 
And weigh not men, and therefore not men's words. 
Admired I am of those that hate me most. 
Though some speak openly against my books, 
Yet will they read me and thereby attain 
To Peter's Chair; And when they cast me off, 
Are poisoned by my climbing followers. 
I count Religion but a childish Toy 
And hold there is no sin but Ignorance. 
Birds of the Air will tell of murders past? 
I am ashamed to hear such fooleries. 
Many will talk of Title to a Crown. 
What right had Caesar to the Empire? 
Might first made Kings, and Laws were then most sure 
When, like the Draco's, they were writ in blood. 
Hence comes it that a strong built Citadel 
Commands much more than letters can import: 
Which maxim had Phalaris observed, 
H' had never bellowed in a brazen Bull, 
Of great one's envy: o' the poor petty wights 
Let me be envied and not pitied! 
But whither am I bound? I come not, I, 
To read a lecture here in Britain, 
But to present the Tragedy of a Jew 
Who smiles to see how full his bags are crammed, 
Which money was not got without my means. 
I crave but this. Grace him as he deserves, 
And let him not be entertained the worse 
So that of thus much that return was made; 
And of the third part of the Persian ships 
There was the venture summed and satisfied. 
As for those Samnites and the men of Uz 
That bought my Spanish Oils and Wines of Greece, 
Here have I pursed their paltry silverlings. 
Fie, what a trouble 'tis to count this trash! 
Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay 
The things they traffic for with wedge of gold, 
Whereof a man may easily in a day 
Tell that which may maintain him all his life. 
The needy groom, that never fingered groat 
Would make a miracle of thus much coin, 
But he whose steel barred coffers are crammed full, 
And all his lifetime hath been tired 
Wearying his fingers' ends with telling it, 
Would in his age be loath to labor so, 
And for a pound to sweat himself to death. 
Give me the Merchants of the Indian Mines 
That trade in metal of the purest mold, 
The wealthy Moor, that in the Eastern rocks 
Without control can pick his riches up 
And in his house heap pearl like pebblestones, 
Receive them free and sell them by the weight, 
Bags of fiery Opals, Sapphires, Amethysts, 
Jacinths, hard Topaz, grass green Emeralds, 
Beauteous Rubies, sparkling Diamonds, 
And seldseen costly stones of so great price 
As one of them, indifferently rated 
And of a Carat of this quantity, 
May serve in peril of calamity 
To ransom great Kings from captivity. 
This is the ware wherein consists my wealth. 
And thus methinks should men of judgment frame 
Their means of traffic from the vulgar trade, 
And as their wealth increaseth, so enclose 
Infinite riches in a little room. 
Into what corner peers my Halcyon's bill? 
Ha! to the East? yes; See how stand the Vanes! 
East and by South: why then I hope my ships 
I sent for Egypt and the bordering Isles 
Are gotten up by Nilus' winding banks. 
Mine Argosy from Alexandria, 
Loaden with Spice and Silks, now under sail, 
Are smoothly gliding down by Candy shore 
To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea. 
Riding in Malta Road, And all the Merchants 
With other Merchandise are safe arrived, 
And have sent me to know whether yourself 
The ships are safe thou say'st, and richly fraught? 
They are.  Why, then go bid them come ashore, 
And bring with them their bills of entry. 
I hope our credit in the Customhouse 
Will serve as well as I were present there. 
Go send 'em threescore Camels, thirty Mules, 
And twenty Wagons, to bring up the ware. 
But art thou master in a ship of mine, 
And is thy credit not enough for that? 
The very Custom barely comes to more 
Than many Merchants of the Town are worth, 
And therefore far exceeds my credit, Sir. 
Go tell 'em the Jew of Malta sent thee, man. 
Tush, who amongst 'em knows not Barabas? 
I go. So, then, there's somewhat come. 
Sirrah, which of my ships art thou Master of? 
Of the Speranza, Sir. And saw'st thou not 
Mine Argosy at Alexandria? 
Thou couldst not come from Egypt or by Caire, 
But at the entry there into the sea, 
Where Nilus pays his tribute to the main, 
Thou needs must sail by Alexandria. 
I neither saw them nor inquired of them: 
But this we heard some of our seamen say: 
They wondered how you durst with so much wealth 
Trust such a crazed Vessel, and so far. 
Tush, they are wise! I know her and her strength. 
But go, go thou thy ways, discharge thy Ship, 
And bid my Factor bring his loading in. 
And yet I wonder at this argosy. 
Thine Argosy from Alexandria, 
Know, Barabas, doth ride in Malta Road, 
Laden with riches, and exceeding store 
Of Persian silks, of gold, and Orient Pearl. 
How chance you came not with those other ships 
That sailed by Egypt?  Sir, we saw 'em not. 
Belike they coasted round by Candy shore 
About their Oils or other businesses. 
But 'twas ill done of you to come so far 
Without the aid or conduct of their ships. 
Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish Fleet 
That never left us till within a league, 
That had the Galleys of the Turk in chase. 
O, they were going up to Sicily. 
And bid the Merchants and my men dispatch 
And come ashore, and see the fraught discharged. 
Thus trowls our fortune in by land and Sea, 
And thus are we on every side enriched. 
These are the Blessings promised to the Jews, 
And herein was old Abram's happiness. 
What more may Heaven do for earthly man 
Than thus to pour out plenty in their laps, 
Ripping the bowels of the earth for them, 
Making the Sea their servant, and the winds 
To drive their substance with successful blasts? 
Who hateth me but for my happiness? 
Or who is honored now but for his wealth? 
Rather had I, a Jew, be hated thus, 
Than pitied in a Christian poverty; 
For I can see no fruits in all their faith, 
But malice, falsehood, and excessive pride, 
Which methinks fits not their profession. 
Haply some hapless man hath conscience, 
And for his conscience lives in beggary. 
They say we are a scattered Nation: 
I cannot tell, but we have scrambled up 
More wealth by far than those that brag of faith. 
There's Kirriah Jairim, the great Jew of Greece, 
Obed in Bairseth, Nones in Portugal, 
Myself in Malta, some in italy, 
Many in France, and wealthy every one, 
Ay, wealthier far than any Christian. 
I must confess we come not to be Kings. 
That's not our fault. Alas, our number's few, 
And Crowns come either by succession 
Or urged by force, and nothing violent, 
Oft have I heard tell, can be permanent. 
Give us a peaceful rule; make Christians Kings, 
That thirst so much for Principality. 
I have no charge, nor many children, 
But one sole Daughter, whom I hold as dear 
As Agamemnon did his Iphigen; 
And all I have is hers. But who comes here? 
Tush, tell not me; 'twas done of policy. 
Come, therefore, let us go to Barabas, 
For he can counsel best in these affairs: 
And here he comes.  Why, how now, Countrymen? 
Why flock you thus to me in multitudes? 
What accident's betided to the Jews? 
A fleet of warlike Galleys, Barabas, 
Are come from Turkey and lie in our Road, 
And they this day sit in the Council house 
To entertain them and their Embassy. 
Why, let 'em come, so they come not to war, 
Or let 'em war, so we be conquerors. 
Nay, let 'em combat, conquer, and kill all, 
So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth.  
Were it for confirmation of a League, 
They would not come in warlike manner thus. 
I fear their coming will afflict us all. 
Fond men, what dream you of their multitudes? 
What need they treat of peace that are in league? 
The Turks and those of Malta are in league. 
Tut, tut, there is some other matter in't. 
Why, Barabas, they come for peace or war. 
Haply for neither, but to pass along, 
Towards Venice by the Adriatic Sea, 
With whom they have attempted many times, 
But never could effect their Stratagem. 
And very wisely said; it may be so. 
But there's a meeting in the senate House, 
And all the Jews in Malta must be there. 
Umh, all the Jews in Malta must be there. 
Ay, like enough. Why then, let every man 
Provide him and be there for fashion's sake. 
If anything shall there concern our state, 
Assure yourselves I'll look - unto myself.  
I know you will. - well, brethren, let us go. 
Let's take our leaves. - Farewell, good Barabas. 
Do so. Farewell, Zaareth; farewell, Temainte. 
And, Barabas, now search this secret out. 
Summon thy senses; call thy wits together: 
These silly men mistake the matter clean. 
Long to the Turk did Malta contribute, 
Which Tribute - all in policy, I fear - 
The Turks have let increase to such a sum 
As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay, 
And now by that advantage thinks, belike, 
To seize upon the Town; ay, that he seeks. 
Howe'er the world go, I'll make sure for one, 
And seek in time to intercept the worst, 
Warily guarding that which I ha' got. 
Ego mihimet sum semper proximus. 
Why, let 'em enter, let 'em take the Town. 
Now, Bassoes, what demand you at our hands? 
Know, Knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes, 
From Cyprus, Candy, and those other Isles 
That lie betwixt the Mediterranean seas. 
What's Cyprus, Candy, and those other Isles 
To us or Malta? what at our hands demand ye? 
The ten years' tribute that remains unpaid. 
Alas, my Lord, the sum is overgreat! 
I hope your Highness will consider us. 
I wish, grave Governor, 'twere in my power 
To favor you; but 'tis my father's cause, 
Wherein I may not, nay, I dare not dally. 
Then give us leave, great Selim Calymath. 
Stand all aside, and let the Knights determine, 
And send to keep our Galleys under sail, 
For happily we shall not tarry here. 
Now, Governor, how are you resolved? 
Thus: since your hard conditions are such 
That you will needs have ten years' tribute past, 
We may have time to make collection 
Amongst the Inhabitants of Malta for't. 
That's more than is in our Commission. 
What, Callapine, a little courtesy! 
Let's know their time; perhaps it is not long; 
And 'tis more Kingly to obtain by peace 
Than to enforce conditions by constraint. 
What respite ask you, Governor?  But a month. 
We grant a month, but see you keep your promise. 
Now launch our Galleys back again to Sea, 
Where we'll attend the respite you have ta'en, 
And for the money send our messenger. 
Farewell, great Governor, and brave Knights of Malta. 
And all good fortune wait on Calymath. 
Go one and call those Jews of Malta hither. 
Were they not summoned to appear today? 
They were, my Lord; and here they come. 
Have you determined what to say to them? 
Yes; give me leave - and, Hebrews, now come near. 
From the Emperor of Turkey is arrived 
Great Selim Calymath, his Highness' son, 
To levy of us ten years' tribute past. 
Now, then, here know that it concerneth us. 
Then, good my Lord, to keep your quiet still, 
Your Lordship shall do well to let them have it. 
Soft, Barabas, there's more 'longs to't than so. 
To what this ten years' tribute will amount, 
That we have cast, but cannot compass it 
By reason of the wars, that robbed our store; 
And therefore are we to request your aid. 
Alas, my Lord, we are no soldiers; 
And what's our aid against so great a Prince? 
Tut, Jew, we know thou art no soldier. 
Thou art a Merchant and a moneyed man, 
And 'tis thy money, Barabas, we seek. 
How, my Lord? my money?  Thine and the rest; 
For, to be short, amongst you 'tmust be had. 
Alas, my Lord, the most of us are poor. 
Then let the rich increase your portions. 
Are strangers with your tribute to be taxed? 
Have strangers leave with us to get their wealth? 
Then let them with us contribute. 
How? equally?  No, Jew, like infidels; 
For through our sufferance of your hateful lives, 
Who stand accursed in the sight of heaven, 
These taxes and afflictions are befall'n, 
And therefore thus we are determined; 
Read there the Articles of our decrees. 
How, half his estate? I hope you mean not mine. 
How, a Christian? Hum, what's here to do? 
O, my Lord, we will give half. 
O, earth-mettled villains, and no Hebrews born! 
And will you basely thus submit yourselves 
To leave your goods to their arbitrement? 
Why, Barabas, wilt thou be christened? 
No, Governor, I will be no convertite. 
Why, know you what you did by this device? 
Half of my substance is a City's wealth. 
Governor, it was not got so easily; 
Nor will I part so slightly therewithal. 
Sir, half is the penalty of our decree. 
Either pay that, or we will seize on all. 
Corpo di dio! stay: you shall have half. 
Let me be used but as my brethren are. 
No, Jew, thou hast denied the Articles, 
Is theft the ground of your Religion? 
No, Jew; we take particularly thine 
To save the ruin of a multitude, 
And better one want for a common good 
Than many perish for a private man. 
Yet, Barabas, we will not banish thee, 
But here in Malta, where thou got'st thy wealth, 
Live still, and, if thou canst, get more. 
Christians, what or how can I multiply? 
Of nought is nothing made. 
From nought at first thou cam'st to little wealth, 
From little unto more, from more to most, 
If your first curse fall heavy on thy head, 
And make thee poor and scorned of all the world, 
'Tis not our fault, but thy inherent sin. 
What, bring you Scripture to confirm your wrongs? 
Preach me not out of my possessions. 
Some Jews are wicked, as all Christians are; 
But say the Tribe that I descended of 
Were all in general cast away for sin, 
Shall I be tried for their transgression? 
The man that dealeth righteously shall live. 
And which of you can charge me otherwise? 
Sham'st thou not thus to justify thyself, 
As if we knew not thy profession? 
If thou rely upon thy righteousness, 
Be patient, and thy riches will increase. 
Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness, 
And covetousness, o, 'tis a monstrous sin. 
Ay, but theft is worse. Tush, take not from me then, 
For that is theft; and, if you rob me thus, 
I must be forced to steal and compass more. 
Grave Governor, list not to his exclaims. 
Convert his mansion to a Nunnery; 
His house will harbor many holy Nuns. 
It shall be so. now, Officers, have you done? 
Ay, my lord, we have seized upon the goods 
And wares of Barabas, which, being valued, 
Amount to more than all the wealth in Malta. 
And of the other we have seized half. 
Then we'll take order for the residue. 
Well, then, my Lord, say, are you satisfied? 
You have my goods, my money, and my wealth, 
My ships, my store, and all that I enjoyed. 
And, having all, you can request no more, 
Unless your unrelenting flinty hearts 
Suppress all pity in your stony breasts, 
And now shall move you to bereave my life. 
No, Barabas. To stain our hands with blood 
Is far from us and our profession. 
Why, I esteem the injury far less 
To take the lives of miserable men 
Than be the causers of their misery. 
You have my wealth, the labor of my life, 
The comfort of mine age, my children's hope, 
And therefore ne'er distinquish of the wrong. 
Content thee, Barabas; thou hast nought but right. 
Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong. 
But take it to you, I' the devil's name! 
Come, let us in and gather of these goods 
The money for this tribute of the Turk. 
'Tis necessary that be looked unto, 
For if we break our day, we break the league, 
And that will prove but simple policy. 
Ay, policy? that's their profession, 
And not simplicity, as they suggest. 
The plagues of Egypt and the curse of heaven, 
Earth's barrenness, and all men's hatred, 
Inflict upon them, thou great Primus Motor! 
And here upon my knees, striking the earth, 
I ban their souls to everlasting pains, 
And extreme tortures of the fiery deep, 
That thus have dealt with me in my distress. 
O, yet be patient, gentle Barabas. 
O silly brethren, born to see this day, 
Why stand you thus unmoved with my laments? 
Why weep you not to think upon my wrongs? 
Why pine not I, and die in this distress? 
Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brook 
The cruel handling of ourselves in this. 
Thou seest they have taken half our goods. 
Why did you yield to their extortion? 
You were a multitude, and I but one, 
And of me only have they taken all. 
Yet, brother Barabas, remember Job. 
What tell you me of Job? I wot his wealth 
Was written thus: he had seven thousand sheep, 
Three thousand Camels, and two hundred yoke 
Of laboring Oxen, and five hundred 
She Asses. but for every one of those, 
Had they been valued at indifferent rate, 
I had at home, and in mine Argosy 
And other ships that came from Egypt last, 
As much as would have bought his beasts and him, 
And yet have kept enough to live upon; 
So that not he, but I, may curse the day, 
Thy fatal birthday, forlorn Barabas, 
And henceforth wish for an eternal night, 
That clouds of darkness may enclose my flesh, 
And hide these extreme sorrows from mine eyes, 
For only I have toiled to inherit here 
The months of vanity and loss of time, 
And painful nights have been appointed me. 
Ay, I pray, leave me in my patience. 
But give him liberty at least to mourn, 
That in a field amidst his enemies 
Doth see his soldiers slain, himself disarmed, 
And knows no means of his recovery. 
Ay, let me sorrow for this sudden chance. 
'Tis in the trouble of my spirit I speak: 
Great injuries are not so soon forgot. 
Come, let us leave him. In his ireful mood 
Our words will but increase his ecstasy. 
On, then. But, trust me, 'tis a misery 
To see a man in such affliction. 
Farewell, Barabas.  Ay, fare you well. 
See the simplicity of these base slaves, 
Who, for the villains have no wit themselves, 
Think me to be a senseless lump of clay 
That will with every water wash to dirt. 
No, Barabas is born to better chance 
And framed of finer mold than common men 
That measure nought but by the present time. 
A reaching thought will search his deepest wits 
And cast with cunning for the time to come, 
For evils are apt to happen every day. 
But whither wends my beauteous Abigail? 
O, what has made my lovely daughter sad? 
What, woman! moan not for a little loss. 
Thy father has enough in store for thee. 
Not for myself, but aged Barabas, 
Father, for thee lamenteth Abigail. 
But I will learn to leave these fruitless tears, 
And, urged thereto with my afflictions, 
With fierce exclaims run to the Senate house, 
And in the Senate reprehend them all, 
And rend their hearts with tearing of my hair, 
Till they reduce the wrongs done to my father. 
No, Abigail. Things past recovery 
Are hardly cured with exclamations. 
Be silent, Daughter. sufferance breeds ease, 
And time may yield us an occasion, 
Which on the sudden cannot serve the turn. 
Besides, my girl, think me not all so fond 
As negligently to forego so much 
Without provision for thyself and me. 
Ten thousand Portagues, besides great Pearls, 
Rich costly Jewels, and Stones infinite, 
Fearing the worst of this before it fell, 
Where, father?  In my house, my girl. 
Then shall they ne'er be seen of Barabas, 
For they have seized upon thy house and wares. 
But they will give me leave once more, I trow, 
To go into my house.  That may they not, 
For there I left the Governor placing Nuns, 
Displacing me; and of thy house they mean 
To make a Nunnery, where none but their own sect 
Must enter in; men generally barred. 
My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone. 
You partial heavens, have I deserved this plague? 
What, will you thus oppose me, luckless Stars, 
To make me desperate in my poverty? 
And knowing me impatient in distress, 
Think me so mad as I will hang myself, 
That I may vanish o'er the earth in air 
And leave no memory that e'er I was? 
No, I will live; nor loathe I this my life. 
And since you leave me in the Ocean thus 
To sink or swim, and put me to my shifts, 
I'll rouse my senses, and awake myself. 
Daughter, I have it: thou perceiv'st the plight 
Wherein these Christians have oppressed me. 
Be ruled by me, for in extremity 
We ought to make bar of no policy. 
Father, whate'er it be, to injure them 
That have so manifestly wronged us, 
What will not Abigail attempt?  Why, so. 
Then thus: thou toldst me they have turned my house 
Into a Nunnery, and some Nuns are there? 
I did.  Then, Abigail, there must my girl 
Entreat the Abbess to be entertained. 
How? as a Nun?  Ay, Daughter, for Religion 
Hides many mischiefs from suspicion. 
Ay, but father, they will suspect me there. 
Let 'em suspect, but be thou so precise 
As they may think it done of Holiness. 
Entreat 'em fair, and give them friendly speech, 
And seem to them as if thy sins were great, 
Till thou hast gotten to be entertained. 
Thus, father, shall I much dissemble.  Tush! 
As good dissemble that thou never mean'st 
As first mean truth and then dissemble it. 
What then shall follow?  This shall follow then: 
There have I hid, close underneath the plank 
That runs along the upper chamber floor, 
The gold and Jewels which I kept for thee. 
But here they come. Be cunning, Abigail. 
Then, father, go with me.  No, Abigail, in this 
It is not necessary I be seen, 
For I will seem offended with thee for't. 
Be close, my girl, for this must fetch my gold. 
We now are almost at the new made Nunnery. 
The better; for we love not to be seen. 
'Tis thirty winters long since some of us 
Did stray so far amongst the multitude. 
And quarters of this new made Nunnery 
It may be so. But who comes here? 
Grave Abbess, and you happy Virgins' guide, 
Pity the state of a distressed Maid. 
The hopeless daughter of a hapless Jew, 
The Jew of Malta, wretched Barabas, 
Sometimes the owner of a goodly house, 
Which they have now turned to a Nunnery. 
Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with us? 
Fearing the afflictions which my father feels 
Proceed from sin or want of faith in us, 
I'd pass away my life in penitence 
And be a Novice in your Nunnery 
To make atonement for my laboring soul. 
Well, daughter, we admit you for a Nun. 
First let me as a Novice learn to frame 
My solitary life to your straight laws, 
And let me lodge where I was wont to lie. 
I do not doubt, by your divine precepts 
And mine own industry, but to profit much. 
As much, I hope, as all I hid is worth.  
Hinder her not, thou man of little faith, 
For she has mortified herself.  How, mortified! 
And is admitted to the Sisterhood. 
Child of perdition, and thy father's shame, 
What wilt thou do among these hateful fiends? 
I charge thee on my blessing that thou leave 
These devils and their damned heresy. 
And think upon the Jewels and the gold; 
The board is marked thus that covers it. 
Away, accursed, from thy father's sight! 
Barabas, although thou art in misbelief 
And wilt not see thine own afflictions, 
Yet let thy daughter be no longer blind. 
Blind, Friar? I reck not thy persuasions. 
The board is marked thus and that covers it 
For I had rather die than see her thus. 
Wilt thou forsake me too in my distress, 
Seduced Daughter? Go, forget not.  
Becomes it Jews to be so credulous? 
Tomorrow early I'll be at the door. 
No, come not at me. If thou wilt, be damned. 
Forget me, see me not; and so, be gone. 
Farewell! Remember tomorrow morning.   
Who's this? fair Abigail, the rich Jew's 
Daughter, become a Nun? her father's sudden fall 
Has humbled her, and brought her down to this. 
Tut, she were fitter for a tale of love 
Than to be tired out with Orisons, 
And better would she far become a bed, 
Embraced in a friendly lover's arms, 
Than rise at midnight to a solemn mass. 
Why, how now, Don Mathias, in a dump? 
Believe me, Noble Lodowick, I have seen 
The strangest sight, in my opinion, 
That ever I beheld.  What was't, I prithee? 
A fair young maid, scarce fourteen years of age, 
The sweetest flower in Cytherea's field, 
Cropped from the pleasures of the fruitful earth 
And strangely metamorphosed Nun.  But say, What was she? 
Why, the rich Jew's daughter. 
What? Barabas, whose goods were lately seized? 
Is she so fair?  And matchless beautiful. 
As, had you seen her, 'twould have moved your heart, 
Though countermined with walls of brass, to love 
Or, at the least, to pity. 
And if she be so fair as you report, 
'Twere time well spent to go and visit her. 
I must and will, Sir; there's no remedy. 
And so will I too, or it shall go hard. 
Farewell, Mathias.  Farewell, Lodowick.  
Thus, like the sad presaging Raven that tolls 
The sick man's passport in her hollow beak, 
And in the shadow of the silent night 
Doth shake contagion from her sable wings, 
Vexed and tormented runs poor Barabas 
With fatal curses towards these Christians. 
The uncertain pleasures of swift-footed time 
Have ta'en their flight, and left me in despair, 
And of my former riches rests no more 
But bare remembrance, like a soldier's scar 
That has no further comfort for his maim. 
O thou, that with a fiery pillar ledst 
The sons of Israel through the dismal shades, 
Light Abraham's offspring; and direct the hand 
Of Abigail this night, or let the day 
Turn to eternal darkness after this. 
No sleep can fasten on my watchful eyes, 
Nor quiet enter my distempered thoughts, 
Till I have answer of my Abigail. 
Now have I happily espied a time 
To search the plank my father did appoint, 
And here, behold (unseen) where I have found 
The gold, the pearls, and Jewels, which he hid. 
Now I remember those old women's words, 
Who, in my wealth, would tell me winter's tales, 
And speak of spirits and ghosts that glide by night 
About the place where Treasure hath been hid; 
And now methinks that I am one of those, 
For whilst I live, here lives my soul's sole hope, 
And when I die, here shall my spirit walk. 
Now that my father's fortune were so good 
As but to be about this happy place! 
'Tis not so happy. Yet when we parted last, 
He said he would attend me in the morn. 
Then, gentle sleep, where'er his body rests, 
Give charge to Morpheus that he may dream 
A golden dream, and of the sudden walk, 
Come, and receive the Treasure I have found. 
Bueno para todos mi ganado no era. 
As good go on, as sit so sadly thus. 
But stay! what star shines yonder in the East? 
The Loadstar of my life, if Abigail. 
Who's there?  Who's that?  Peace, Abigail, 'tis I. 
Then, father, here receive thy happiness. 
Here, Hast thou't? There's more, and more, and more. 
My gold, my fortune, my felicity, 
Strength to my soul, death to mine enemy. 
Welcome the first beginner of my bliss. 
O Abigail, Abigail, that I had thee here too, 
Then my desires were fully satisfied. 
But I will practice thy enlargement thence. 
O girl, o gold, o beauty, o my bliss! 
Father, it draweth towards midnight now, 
And 'bout this time the Nuns begin to wake; 
To shun suspicion, therefore, let us part. 
Farewell, my joy, and by my fingers take 
A kiss from him that sends it from his soul. 
Now, Phoebus, ope the eyelids of the day, 
And for the Raven wake the morning Lark, 
That I may hover with her in the Air, 
Singing o'er these, as she does o'er her young. 
Hermoso placer de los dineros.  
Now, Captain, tell us whither thou art bound, 
Whence is thy ship that anchors in our Road, 
And why thou cam'st ashore without our leave? 
Governor of Malta, hither am I bound. 
My Ship, the flying Dragon, is of Spain, 
And so am I. Del Bosco is my name, 
Vice-admiral unto the Catholic King. 
'tis true, my lord; therefore entreat him well. 
Our fraught is Grecians, Turks, and Afric Moors; 
For late upon the coast of Corsica, 
Because we vailed not to the Turkish Fleet, 
Their creeping Galleys had us in the chase; 
But suddenly the wind began to rise, 
And then we luffed and tacked, and fought at ease. 
Some have we fired, and many have we sunk, 
But one amongst the rest became our prize. 
The Captain's slain; the rest remain our slaves, 
Of whom we would make sale in Malta here. 
Martin del Bosco, I have heard of thee. 
Welcome to Malta, and to all of us. 
But to admit a sale of these thy Turks, 
We may not, nay, we dare not give consent, 
By reason of a Tributary league. 
Del Bosco, as thou lovest and honor'st us, 
Persuade our Governor against the Turk. 
This truce we have is but in hope of gold, 
And with that sum he craves might we wage war. 
Will Knights of Malta be in league with Turks, 
And buy it basely too for sums of gold? 
My Lord, remember that, to Europe's shame, 
The Christian Isle of Rhodes, from whence you came, 
Was lately lost, and you were stated here 
To be at deadly enmity with Turks. 
Captain, we know it, but our force is small. 
What is the sum that Calymath requires? 
A hundred thousand Crowns. 
My Lord and King hath title to this Isle, 
And he means quickly to expel you hence; 
Therefore be ruled by me, and keep the gold. 
I'll write unto his Majesty for aid, 
And not depart until I see you free. 
On this condition shall thy Turks be sold. 
Go, Officers, and set them straight in show. 
Bosco, thou shalt be Malta's General. 
We and our warlike Knights will follow thee 
Against these barbarous misbelieving Turks. 
So shall you imitate those you succeed; 
For when their hideous force environed Rhodes, 
Small though the number was that kept the Town, 
They fought it out, and not a man survived 
To bring the hapless news to Christendom. 
So will we fight it out. Come, let's away. 
Proud daring Calymath, instead of gold 
We'll send thee bullets wrapped in smoke and fire. 
Claim tribute where thou wilt, we are resolved. 
Honor is bought with blood and not with gold. 
This is the Market place; here let 'em stand. 
Fear not their sale, for they'll be quickly bought. 
Everyone's price is written on his back, 
And so much must they yield, or not be sold. 
Here comes the Jew. Had not his goods been seized, 
He'd give us present money for them all. 
In spite of these swine-eating Christians, 
(Unchosen Nation, never circumcised, 
Such as, poor villains, were ne'er thought upon 
Till Titus and Vespasian conquered us,) 
Am I become as wealthy as I was. 
They hoped my daughter would ha' been a Nun; 
But she's at home, and I have bought a house 
As great and fair as is the Governor's; 
And there, in spite of Malta, will I dwell, 
Having Ferneze's hand, whose heart I'll have, 
Ay, and his son's too, or it shall go hard. 
I am not of the Tribe of Levi, I, 
That can so soon forget an injury. 
We Jews can fawn like Spaniels when we please, 
And when we grin, we bite; yet are our looks 
As innocent and harmless as a Lamb's. 
I learned in Florence how to kiss my hand, 
Heave up my shoulders when they call me dog, 
And duck as low as any barefoot Friar, 
Hoping to see them starve upon a stall, 
Or else be gathered for in our Synagogue, 
That when the offering Basin comes to me, 
Even for charity I may spit into't. 
Here comes Don Lodowick, the Governor's son, 
One that I love for his good father's sake. 
I hear the wealthy Jew walked this way. 
I'll seek him out, and so insinuate 
That I may have a sight of Abigail, 
For Don Mathias tells me she is fair. 
Now will I show myself to have more of the Serpent 
Than the Dove; that is, more knave than fool. 
Yond' walks the Jew: now for fair Abigail. 
Ay, ay, no doubt but she's at your command. 
Barabas, thou know'st I am the Governor's son. 
No further. 'tis a custom held with us, 
That when we speak with Gentiles like to you, 
We turn into the Air to purge ourselves, 
For unto us the Promise doth belong. 
Well, Barabas, canst help me to a Diamond? 
O, sir, your father had my Diamonds; 
Yet I have one left that will serve your turn. 
I mean my daughter, but, ere he shall have her, 
I'll sacrifice her on a pile of wood. 
I ha' the poison of the City for him, 
What sparkle does it give without a foil? 
The Diamond that I talk of ne'er was foiled. 
But, when he touches it, it will be foiled. 
Lord Lodowick, it sparkles bright and fair. 
Is it square or pointed? pray, let me know. 
Pointed it is, good Sir. But not for you. 
I like it much the better.  So do I too. 
How shows it by night?  Outshines Cynthia's rays. 
You'll like it better far 'a nights than days. 
Your life, and if you have it. O my Lord, 
We will not jar about the price. come to my house 
And I will give't your honor - with a vengeance. 
No, Barabas, I will deserve it first. 
Your father has deserved it at my hands, 
Who, of mere charity and Christian ruth, 
To bring me to religious purity, 
And, as it were, in Catechising sort, 
To make me mindful of my mortal sins, 
Against my will, and whether I would or no, 
Seized all I had, and thrust me out a doors, 
And made my house a place for Nuns most chaste. 
No doubt your soul shall reap the fruit of it. 
Ay, but, my Lord, the harvest is far off. 
And yet I know the prayers of those Nuns 
And holy Friars, having money for their pains, 
Are wondrous - and indeed do no man good.  
And seeing they are not idle, but still doing, 
'tis likely they in time may reap some fruit, 
I mean, in fullness of perfection. 
Good Barabas, glance not at our holy Nuns. 
No, but I do it through a burning zeal, - 
Hoping ere long to set the house afire, 
For though they do a while increase and multiply, 
I'll have a saying to that Nunnery. -  
As for the Diamond, Sir, I told you of, 
Come home, and there's no price shall make us part, 
Even for your Honorable father's sake. 
It shall go hard but I will see your death.  
But now I must be gone to buy a slave. 
And, Barabas, I'll bear thee company. 
Come then. Here's the market place. 
what's the price of this slave, two hundred crowns? 
What? can he steal, that you demand so much? 
Belike he has some new trick for a purse; 
An if he has, he is worth three hundred plates, 
So that, being bought, the Town seal might be got 
To keep him for his lifetime from the gallows. 
The Sessions day is critical to thieves, 
And few or none 'scape but by being purged. 
Ratest thou this Moor but at two hundred plates? 
Why should this Turk be dearer than that Moor? 
Because he is young and has more qualities. 
So much the better. Thou art for my turn. 
An hundred Crowns? I'll have him; there's the coin. 
Then mark him, Sir, and take him hence. 
Ay, mark him, you were best; for this is he 
That by my help shall do much villainy. 
My Lord, farewell. Come, Sirrah, you are mine. 
As for the Diamond, it shall be yours. 
I pray, Sir, be no stranger at my house; 
All that I have shall be at your command. 
What makes the Jew and Lodowick so private? 
I fear me 'tis about fair Abigail. 
Yonder comes Don Mathias. let us stay. 
He loves my daughter, and she holds him dear, 
But I have sworn to frustrate both their hopes, 
And be revenged upon the - Governor. 
This Moor is comeliest, is he not? speak, son. 
No, this is the better, mother, view this well. 
Seem not to know me here before your mother, 
Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand. 
When you have brought her home, come to my house. 
Think of me as thy father. Son, farewell. 
But wherefore talked Don Lodowick with you? 
Tush, man, we talked of Diamonds, not of Abigail. 
Tell me, Mathias, is not that the Jew? 
As for the Comment on the Maccabees, 
I have it, Sir, and 'tis at your command. 
Yes, Madam, and my talk with him was 
About the borrowing of a book or two. 
Converse not with him; he is cast off from heaven. 
Thou hast thy Crowns, fellow. come, let's away. 
A reasonable market, let's away. 
Now let me know thy name, and therewithal 
Thy birth, condition, and profession. 
Faith, Sir, my birth is but mean; my name's 
Ithamore; my profession what you please. 
Hast thou no Trade? then listen to my words, 
And I will teach thee that shall stick by thee. 
First, be thou void of these affections: 
Compassion, love, vain hope, and heartless fear. 
Be moved at nothing. See thou pity none, 
But to thyself smile when the Christians moan. 
O, brave master, I worship your nose for this. 
As for myself, I walk abroad anights 
And kill sick people groaning under walls. 
Sometimes I go about and poison wells, 
And now and then, to cherish Christian thieves, 
I am content to lose some of my Crowns 
That I may, walking in my Gallery, 
See 'em go pinioned along by my door. 
Being young, I studied Physic, and began 
To practice first upon the Italian. 
There I enriched the Priests with burials 
And always kept the Sexton's arms in ure 
With digging graves and ringing dead men's knells. 
And after that was I an Engineer, 
And in the wars 'twixt France and Germany, 
Under pretense of helping Charles the fifth, 
Slew friend and enemy with my stratagems. 
Then after that was I an Usurer, 
And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting, 
And tricks belonging unto Brokery, 
I filled the Gaols with Bankrupts in a year, 
And with young Orphans planted Hospitals, 
And every Moon made some or other mad, 
And now and then one hang himself for grief, 
Pinning upon his breast a long great Scroll 
How I with interest tormented him. 
But mark how I am blest for plaguing them. 
I have as much coin as will buy the Town. 
But tell me now, how hast thou spent thy time? 
In setting Christian villages on fire, 
Chaining of eunuchs, binding Galley slaves. 
One time I was an Hostler at an Inn, 
And in the night time secretly would I steal 
To travelers' Chambers, and there cut their throats. 
Once at Jerusalem, where the pilgrims kneeled, 
I strewed powder on the Marble stones, 
And therewithal their knees would rankle so, 
That I have laughed a good to see the cripples 
Go limping home to Christendom on stilts. 
Why, this is something. Make account of me 
As of thy fellow; we are villains both. 
Both circumcised; we hate Christians both. 
Be true and secret; thou shalt want no gold. 
But stand aside. Here comes Don Lodowick. 
Where is the Diamond you told me of? 
I have it for you, Sir. Please you walk in with 
Me. What, ho, Abigail! open the door, I say. 
In good time, father. Here are letters come 
From Ormus, and the Post stays here within. 
Give me the letters. Daughter, do you hear? 
Entertain Lodowick, the Governor's son, 
With all the courtesy you can afford, 
Provided that you keep your Maidenhead. 
Use him as if he were a Philistine.  
Dissemble, swear, protest, vow love to him; 
He is not of the seed of Abraham. - 
I am a little busy, Sir; pray, pardon me. 
Abigail, bid him welcome for my sake. 
For your sake and his own he's welcome hither. 
Daughter, a word more. Kiss him, speak him fair, 
And like a cunning Jew so cast about 
That ye be both made sure ere you come out. 
O, father, Don Mathias is my love. 
I know it, yet I say make love to him. 
Do, it is requisite it should be so. - 
Nay, on my life, it is my Factor's hand. 
But go you in, I'll think upon the account. 
The account is made, for Lodowick dies. 
My Factor sends me word that a Merchant's fled 
That owes me for a hundred Tun of Wine. 
I weigh it thus much, I have wealth enough. 
For now by this has he kissed Abigail, 
And she vows love to him and he to her. 
As sure as heaven rained Manna for the Jews, 
So sure shall he and Don Mathias die. 
His father was my chiefest enemy. 
Whither goes Don Mathias? stay a while. 
Whither, but to my fair love, Abigail? 
Thou know'st, and heaven can witness it is true, 
That I intend my daughter shall be thine. 
Ay, Barabas, or else thou wrong'st me much. 
O, heaven forbid I should have such a thought. 
Pardon me though I weep: the Governor's son 
Will, whether I will or no, have Abigail. 
He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings. 
She? No, Mathias, no, but sends them back, 
And, when he comes, she locks herself up fast. 
Yet through the keyhole will he talk to her, 
While she runs to the window, looking out 
When you should come and hale him from the door. 
Even now, as I came home, he slipped me in, 
And I am sure he is with Abigail. 
Not for all Malta; therefore sheathe your sword. 
If you love me, no quarrels in my house, 
But steal you in, and seem to see him not. 
I'll give him such a warning ere he goes 
As he shall have small hopes of Abigail. 
What, hand in hand! I cannot suffer this. 
Mathias, as thou lov'st me, not a word. 
Well, let it pass; another time shall serve. 
Barabas, is not that the widow's son? 
Ay, and take heed, for he hath sworn your death. 
My death? what, is the baseborn peasant mad? 
No, no; but happily he stands in fear 
Of that which you, I think, ne'er dream upon, - 
My daughter here, a paltry silly girl. 
Doth she not with her smiling answer you? 
He has my heart; I smile against my will. 
Barabas, thou know'st I have loved thy daughter long.
And so has she done you, even from a child. 
And now I can no longer hold my mind. 
Nor I the affection that I bear to you. 
This is thy Diamond; tell me, shall I have it? 
Win it, and wear it; it is yet unsoiled. 
O, but I know your Lordship would disdain 
To marry with the daughter of a Jew, 
And yet I'll give her many a golden cross 
With Christian posies round about the ring. 
'tis not thy wealth, but her that I esteem. 
And mine you have; yet let me talk to her. 
This offspring of cain, this Jebusite 
That never tasted of the Passover, 
Nor e'er shall see the land of Canaan, 
Nor our Messiah that is yet to come, 
This gentle Maggot, Lodowick, I mean, 
Must be deluded. Let him have thy hand, 
But keep thy heart till Don Mathias comes.  
What? shall I be betrothed to Lodowick? 
It is no sin to deceive a Christian, 
For they themselves hold it a principle, 
Faith is not to be held with Heretics; 
But all are Heretics that are not Jews. 
This follows well, and therefore, daughter, fear not. 
I have entreated her, and she will grant. 
Then, gentle Abigail, plight thy faith to me. 
I cannot choose, seeing my father bids. 
Nothing but death shall part my love and me. 
Now have I that for which my soul hath longed. 
So have not I; but yet I hope I shall. 
O wretched Abigail, what hast thou done? 
Why on the sudden is your color changed? 
I know not. But farewell; I must be gone. 
Stay her, but let her not speak one word more. 
Mute a the sudden! here's a sudden change. 
O muse not at it. 'tis the Hebrew's guise, 
That maidens new betrothed should weep a while. 
Trouble her not. Sweet Lodowick, depart. 
She is thy wife, and thou shalt be mine heir. 
O, is't the custom? then I am resolved. 
But rather let the brightsome heavens be dim, 
And Nature's beauty choke with stifling clouds, 
Than my fair Abigail should frown on me. 
There comes the villain; now I'll be revenged. 
Be quiet, Lodowick. It is enough 
That I have made thee sure to Abigail. 
Well, but for me, as you went in at doors 
You had been stabbed: but not a word on't now. 
Here must no speeches pass, nor swords be drawn. 
Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him. 
No; so shall I, if any hurt be done, 
Be made an accessory of your deeds. 
Revenge it on him when you meet him next. 
For this I'll have his heart. 
Do so. Lo, here I give thee Abigail. 
What greater gift can poor Mathias have? 
Shall Lodowick rob me of so fair a love? 
My life is not so dear as Abigail. 
My heart misgives me that to cross your love 
He's with your mother. Therefore, after him. 
What, is he gone unto my mother? 
Nay, if you will, stay till she comes herself. 
I cannot stay; for, if my mother come, 
I cannot take my leave of him for tears. 
Father, why have you thus incensed them both? 
What's that to thee?  I'll make 'em friends again.
You'll make 'em friends? are there not Jews enow 
In Malta, but thou must dote upon a Christian? 
I will have Don Mathias; he is my love. 
Yes, you shall have him. Go put her in. 
Now tell me, Ithamore, how lik'st thou this? 
Faith, Master, I think by this 
You purchase both their lives. is it not so? 
True, and it shall be cunningly performed. 
O, master, that I might have a hand in this! 
Ay, so thou shalt; 'tis thou must do the deed. 
Take this and bear it to Mathias straight, 
And tell him that it comes from Lodowick. 
No, no; and yet it might be done that way. 
It is a challenge feigned from Lodowick. 
Fear not. I will so set his heart afire, 
That he shall verily think it comes from him. 
I cannot choose but like thy readiness. 
Yet be not rash, but do it cunningly. 
As I behave myself in this, employ me hereafter. 
So, now will I go in to Lodowick, 
And, like a cunning spirit, feign some lie 
Till I have set 'em both at enmity.  
Since this Town was besieged, my gain grows cold. 
The time has been that but for one bare night 
A hundred Ducats have been freely given, 
But now against my will I must be chaste. 
And yet I know my beauty doth not fail. 
From Venice Merchants, and from Padua 
Were wont to come rare witted Gentlemen, 
Scholars I mean, learned and liberal; 
And now, save Pilia-borza, comes there none, 
And he is very seldom from my house. 
Hold thee, wench, there's something for thee to spend. 
Well, I have delivered the challenge in such sort, 
As meet they will and fighting die  --  brave sport! 
This is the place. Now Abigail shall see 
Whether Mathias holds her dear or no. 
What, dares the villain write in such base terms? 
I did it  --  and revenge it, if thou dar'st. 
O, bravely fought! and yet they thrust not home. 
Now, Lodowick! now, Mathias! so! 
So, now they have showed themselves to be tall fellows. 
Ay, part 'em, now they are dead. Farewell, farewell.  
What sight is this? my Lodowick slain! 
These arms of mine shall be thy Sepulchre. 
Who is this? my son Mathias slain! 
O, Lodowick, hadst thou perished by the Turk, 
Wretched Ferneze might have venged thy death! 
Thy son slew mine, and I'll revenge his death. 
Look, Katharine, look! thy son gave mine these wounds. 
O, leave to grieve me; I am grieved enough. 
O, that my sighs could turn to lively breath, 
And these my tears to blood, that he might live. 
I know not, and that grieves me most of all. 
My son loved thine.  And so did Lodowick him. 
Lend me that weapon that did kill my son, 
Nay, Madam, stay. that weapon was my son's, 
And on that rather should Ferneze die. 
Hold; let's inquire the causers of their deaths, 
That we may venge their blood upon their heads. 
Then take them up, and let them be interred 
Within one sacred monument of stone, 
Upon which Altar I will offer up 
My daily sacrifice of sighs and tears, 
And with my prayers pierce impartial heavens, 
Till they reveal the causers of our smarts, 
Which forced their hands divide united hearts. 
Come, Katharine, our losses equal are; 
Then of true grief let us take equal share.  
Why, was there ever seen such villainy. 
So neatly plotted, and so well performed? 
Both held in hand, and flatly both beguiled? 
Why, how now, Ithamore! why laugh'st thou so? 
O, Mistress! ha, ha, ha!  Why, what ail'st thou? 
Say, knave, why rail'st upon my father thus? 
O, my master has the bravest policy. 
Wherein?  Why, know you not?  Why, no. 
And then they met, and as the story says, 
In doleful wise they ended both their days. 
And was my father furtherer of their deaths? 
Well, Ithamore, let me request thee this: 
Go to the new made nunnery, and inquire 
For any of the Friars of Saint Jaques, 
And say, I pray them come and speak with me. 
Go to, sirrah sauce. Is this your question? 
get ye gone!  I will, forsooth, Mistress.  
Hardhearted Father, unkind Barabas, 
Was this the pursuit of thy policy? 
To make me show them favor severally, 
That by my favor they should both be slain? 
Admit thou lov'dst not Lodowick for his sire, 
Yet Don Mathias ne'er offended thee. 
But thou wert set upon extreme revenge 
Because the Sire dispossessed thee once, 
And couldst not venge it but upon his son, 
Nor on his son but by Mathias' means, 
Nor on Mathias but by murdering me. 
But I perceive there is no love on earth, 
Pity in Jews, nor piety in Turks. 
But here comes cursed Ithamore with the Friar. 
Welcome, grave Friar. Ithamore, begone. 
Know, holy Sir, I am bold to solicit thee. 
To get me be admitted for a Nun. 
Why, Abigail, it is not yet long since 
That I did labor thy admission, 
And then thou didst not like that holy life. 
Then were my thoughts so frail and unconfirmed 
As I was chained to follies of the world, 
But now experience, purchased with grief, 
Has made me see the difference of things. 
My sinful soul, alas, hath paced too long 
The fatal Labyrinth of misbelief, 
Far from the Son that gives eternal life. 
Who taught thee this?  The Abbess of the house, 
Whose zealous admonition I embrace. 
O, therefore, Jacomo, let me be one, 
Although unworthy, of that Sisterhood. 
Abigail, I will. But see thou change no 
More for that will be most heavy to thy soul. 
That was my father's fault. Thy father's, how? 
Nay, you shall pardon me. o Barabas, 
Though thou deservest hardly at my hands, 
Yet never shall these lips bewray thy life. 
Come, shall we go? My duty waits on you.  
What, Abigail become a Nun again? 
False and unkind! what, hast thou lost thy father? 
And, all unknown and unconstrained of me, 
And thou again got to the Nunnery? 
Now here she writes, and wills me to repent. 
Repentance? Spurca! what pretendeth this? 
I fear she knows - 'tis so - of my device 
In Don Mathias' and Lodovico's deaths. 
If so, 'tis time that it be seen into, 
For she that varies from me in belief 
Gives great presumption that she loves me not, 
Or, loving, doth dislike of something done. 
But who comes here? O Ithamore, come near. 
Come near, my love; come near, thy master's life, 
My trusty servant, nay, my second self, 
For I have now no hope but even in thee, 
And on that hope my happiness is built. 
When saw'st thou Abigail?  Today.  With whom? 
A Friar! false villain, he hath done the deed. 
How, Sir?  Why, made mine Abigail a Nun. 
That's no lie, for she sent me for him. 
False, credulous, inconstant Abigail! 
But let 'em go. And, Ithamore, from hence 
Ne'er shall she grieve me more with her disgrace; 
Ne'er shall she live to inherit aught of mine, 
Be blest of me, nor come within my gates, 
But perish underneath my bitter curse, 
Like Cain by Adam, for his brother's death. 
Ithamore, entreat not for her. I am moved, 
And she is hateful to my soul and me, 
And, lest thou yield to this that I entreat, 
I cannot think but that thou hat'st my life. 
Who, I, master? Why, I'll run to some rock, 
And throw myself headlong into the sea. 
Why, I'll do anything for your sweet sake. 
O trusty Ithamore, no servant, but my friend, 
I here adopt thee for mine only heir. 
All that I have is thine when I am dead, 
And, whilst I live, use half. spend as myself. 
Here, take my keys, - I'll give 'em thee anon. 
Go buy thee garments. But thou shalt not want, 
Only know this, that thus thou art to do. 
But first go fetch me in the pot of Rice 
That for our supper stands upon the fire. 
I hold my head my master's hungry. I go, Sir. 
Thus every villain ambles after wealth, 
Although he ne'er be richer than in hope. 
But, husht!  Here 'tis, Master. 
What, hast thou brought the Ladle with thee too? 
Very well, Ithamore, then now be secret, 
And for thy sake, whom I so dearly love, 
Now shalt thou see the death of Abigail, 
That thou mayst freely live to be my heir. 
This Even they use in Malta here, ('tis called 
Saint Jaques' Even) and then, I say, they use 
To send their Alms unto the Nunneries. 
Among the rest bear this, and set it there. 
There's a dark entry where they take it in, 
Where they must neither see the messenger, 
Nor make inquiry who hath sent it them. 
Belike there is some Ceremony in't. 
There, Ithamore, must thou go place this pot. 
Peace, Ithamore; 'tis better so than spared. 
Assure thyself thou shalt have broth by the eye. 
My purse, my Coffer, and myself is thine. 
Stay! first let me stir it, Ithamore. 
As fatal be it to her as the draught 
Of which great Alexander drunk, and died, 
And with her let it work like Borgia's wine, 
Whereof his sire, the Pope, was poisoned. 
In few, the blood of Hydra, Lerna's bane, 
The juice of Hebon, and Cocytus' breath, 
And all the poisons of the Stygian pool 
Break from the fiery kingdom, and in this 
Vomit your venom and envenom her 
That like a fiend hath left her father thus. 
O my sweet Ithamore, go set it down, 
And come again as soon as thou hast done, 
For I have other business for thee. 
And the horse pestilence to boot. away! 
Pay me my wages, for my work is done.  
I'll pay thee with a vengeance, Ithamore. 
Welcome, great Bassoes, how fares Calymath? 
What wind drives you thus into Malta road? 
The wind that bloweth all the world besides, 
Desire of gold.  Desire of gold, great Sir? 
That's to be gotten in the Western Inde; 
In Malta are no golden Minerals. 
To you of Malta thus saith Calymath: 
The time you took for respite is at hand 
For the performance of your promise past; 
And for the Tribute money I am sent. 
Basso, in brief, shalt have no tribute here, 
Nor shall the Heathens live upon our spoil. 
First will we raze the City walls ourselves, 
Lay waste the Island, hew the Temples down, 
And, shipping off our goods to Sicily, 
Open an entrance for the wasteful sea, 
Whose billows, beating the resistless banks, 
Shall overflow it with their refluence. 
Well, Governor, since thou hast broke the league 
By flat denial of the promised Tribute, 
Talk not of razing down your City walls. 
You shall not need trouble yourselves so far, 
For Selim Calymath shall come himself, 
And with brass bullets batter down your Towers, 
And turn proud Malta to a wilderness 
For these intolerable wrongs of yours. 
And so, farewell.  Farewell: 
And now, you men of Malta, look about, 
And let's provide to welcome Calymath. 
Close your Portcullis, charge your Basilisks, 
And as you profitably take up Arms, 
So now courageously encounter them, 
For by this Answer broken is the league, 
And nought is to be looked for now but wars, 
And nought to us more welcome is than wars. 
O, brother, brother, all the Nuns are sick, 
And Physic will not help them; they must die. 
The Abbess sent for me to be confessed: 
O, what a sad confession will there be. 
And so did fair Maria send for me. 
I'll to her lodging; hereabouts she lies.  
What, all dead save only Abigail? 
And I shall die too, for I feel death coming. 
Where is the Friar that conversed with me? 
O, he is gone to see the other Nuns. 
I sent for him, but seeing you are come, 
Be you my ghostly father. And first know 
That in this house I lived religiously, 
Chaste, and devout, much sorrowing for my sins. 
I did offend high heaven so grievously 
As I am almost desperate for my sins, 
And one offense torments me more than all. 
You knew Mathias and Don Lodowick? 
My father did contract me to 'em both: 
First to Don Lodowick; him I never loved. 
Mathias was the man that I held dear, 
And for his sake did I become a Nun. 
Both, jealous of my love, envied each other, 
And by my father's practice, which is there 
Set down at large, the Gallants were both slain. 
To work my peace, this I confess to thee. 
Reveal it not, for then my father dies. 
Know that Confession must not be revealed. 
The Canon Law forbids it, and the Priest 
That makes it known, being degraded first, 
Shall be condemned, and then sent to the fire. 
So I have heard. pray, therefore, keep it close. 
Death seizeth on my heart. Ah, gentle Friar, 
Convert my father that he may be saved, 
And witness that I die a Christian. 
Ay, and a Virgin too; that grieves me most. 
But I must to the Jew, and exclaim on him 
And make him stand in fear of me. 
O, brother, all the Nuns are dead. Let's bury them. 
First help to bury this. Then go with me, 
And help me to exclaim against the Jew. 
A thing that makes me tremble to unfold. 
What, has he crucified a child? 
Thou know'st 'tis death and if it be revealed. 
There is no music to a Christian's knell. 
How sweet the bells ring, now the Nuns are dead, 
That sound at other times like Tinkers' pans. 
I was afraid the poison had not wrought, 
Or, though it wrought, it would have done no good, 
For every year they swell, and yet they live. 
Now all are dead; not one remains alive. 
How can it, if we two be secret? 
But here's a royal Monastery hard by; 
Good master, let me poison all the Monks. 
Thou shalt not need, for now the nuns are dead, 
Do you not sorrow for your daughter's death? 
No, but I grieve because she lived so long, 
An Hebrew born, and would become a Christian. 
God-a-mercy, nose! come, let's begone. 
Stay, wicked Jew; repent, I say, and stay. 
Thou hast offended, therefore must be damned. 
I fear they know we sent the poisoned broth. 
And so do I, master; therefore speak 'em fair. 
She has confessed, and we are both undone, 
My bosom intimates. But I must dissemble.  
O holy Friars, the burden of my sins 
Lies heavy on my soul. Then, pray you, tell me, 
Is't not too late now to turn Christian? 
I have been zealous in the Jewish faith, 
Hardhearted to the poor, a covetous wretch, 
That would for Lucre's sake have sold my soul. 
A hundred for a hundred I have ta'en, 
And now for store of wealth may I compare 
With all the Jews in Malta. but what is wealth? 
I am a Jew, and therefore am I lost. 
Would penance serve for this my sin, 
I could afford to whip myself to death. 
And so could I, but penance will not serve. 
To fast, to pray, and wear a shirt of hair, 
And on my knees creep to Jerusalem. 
Cellars of Wine, and Sollars full of Wheat, 
Warehouses stuffed with spices and with drugs, 
Whole Chests of Gold in Bullion and in Coin, 
Besides I know not how much weight in Pearl, 
Orient and round, have I within my house; 
At Alexandria Merchandise unsold. 
But yesterday two ships went from this Town; 
Their voyage will be worth ten thousand Crowns. 
In Florence, Venice, Antwerp, London, Seville, 
Frankfort, Lubeck, Moscow, and where not, 
Have I debts owing; and, in most of these 
Great sums of money lying in the banco. 
All this I'll give to some religious house, 
So I may be baptized, and live therein. 
O, good Barabas, come to our house. 
O no, good Barabas, come to our house. 
I know that I have highly sinned. 
You shall convert me. You shall have all my wealth. 
O Barabas, their Laws are strict. 
I know they are, and I will be with you. 
They wear no shirts, and they go barefoot too. 
Then 'tis not for me; and I am resolved 
You shall confess me, and have all my goods. 
This is mere frailty. Brethren, be content. 
Friar Bernardine, go you with Ithamore. 
You know my mind; let me alone with him. 
Why does he go to thy house? let him begone. 
I'll give him something and so stop his mouth. 
I never heard of any man but he 
Maligned the order of the Jacobins. 
But do you think that I believe his words? 
Why, Brother, you converted Abigail, 
And I am bound in charity to requite it, 
And so I will. o Jacomo, fail not, but come. 
But, Barabas, who shall be your godfathers? 
For presently you shall be shrived. 
Marry, the Turk shall be one of my godfathers, 
But not a word to any of your Convent. 
So, now the fear is past, and I am safe, 
For he that shrived her is within my house. 
What if I murdered him ere Jacomo comes? 
Now I have such a plot for both their lives 
As never Jew nor Christian knew the like: 
One turned my daughter; therefore he shall die. 
The other knows enough to have my life; 
Therefore 'tis not requisite he should live. 
But are not both these wise men to suppose 
That I will leave my house, my goods, and all, 
To fast and be well whipped? I'll none of that. 
Now, Friar Bernardine, I come to you, 
I'll feast you, lodge you, give you fair words, 
And after that, I and my trusty Turk  --  
No more, but so. It must and shall be done. 
Ithamore, tell me, is the Friar asleep? 
No; 'tis an order which the Friars use. 
Yet, if he knew our meanings, could he 'scape? 
No, none can hear him, cry he ne'er so loud. 
Why, true; therefore did I place him there. 
The other Chambers open towards the street. 
You loiter, master. Wherefore stay we thus? 
O, how I long to see him shake his heels. 
Off with your girdle. Make a handsome noose. 
Friar, awake!  What! do you mean to strangle me? 
Pull hard, I say. you would have had my goods. 
Ay, and our lives too. Therefore pull amain. 
'Tis neatly done, Sir. here's no print at all. 
Then is it as it should be. Take him up. 
Who would not think but that this Friar lived? 
What time a night is't now, sweet Ithamore? 
Then will not Jacomo be long from hence. 
This is the hour wherein I shall proceed; 
O, happy hour, wherein I shall convert 
An Infidel and bring his gold into 
But soft! is not this Bernardine? it is; 
And understanding I should come this way, 
Stands here a purpose, meaning me some wrong, 
And intercept my going to the Jew. 
Wilt thou not speak? thou think'st I see thee not? 
Away, I'd wish thee, and let me go by. 
No, wilt thou not? nay, then I'll force my way. 
And see, a staff stands ready for the purpose. 
As thou lik'st that, stop me another time. 
Why how now, Jacomo! what hast thou done? 
Why, stricken him that would have struck at me. 
Who is it? Bernardine? now out, alas, he is slain. 
No, pardon me. the Law must have his course. 
I must be forced to give in evidence 
That being importuned by this Bernardine 
To be a Christian, I shut him out, 
And there he sat. Now I, to keep my word 
And give my goods and substance to your house, 
Was up thus early, with intent to go 
Unto your Friary because you stayed. 
Fie upon 'em, Master, will you turn Christian, 
when holy Friars turn devils and murder one another? 
No; for this example I'll remain a Jew. 
Heaven bless me! what, a Friar a murderer? 
When shall you see a Jew commit the like? 
Why, a Turk could ha' done no more. 
Tomorrow is the Sessions; you shall to it. 
Come, Ithamore, let's help to take him hence. 
Villains, I am a sacred person. Touch me not. 
The Law shall touch you. We'll but lead you, we. 
'Las, I could weep at your calamity. 
Take in the staff too, for that must be shown. 
Law wills that each particular be known.  
Now, gentle Ithamore, lie in my lap. 
Where are my Maids? provide a running Banquet. 
Send to the Merchant: bid him bring me silks. 
Shall Ithamore, my love, go in such rags? 
And bid the Jeweller come hither too. 
I have no husband; sweet; I'll marry thee. 
Content, but we will leave this paltry land 
And sail from hence to Greece, to lovely Greece. 
I'll be thy Jason, thou my golden Fleece. 
Where painted Carpets o'er the meads are hurled, 
And Bacchus' vineyards overspread the world, 
Where Woods and Forests go in goodly green, 
I'll be Adonis: thou shalt be Love's Queen. 
The Meads, the Orchards, and the Primrose lanes, 
Instead of Sedge and Reed, bear Sugar Canes. 
Thou in those Groves, by Dis above, 
Shalt live with me, and be my love. 
Whither will I not go with gentle Ithamore? 
Plain Barabas? O, that wicked Courtesan! 
He was not wont to call me Barabas. 
'or else I will confess.' ay, there it goes. 
But, if I get him Coupe de Gorge for that. 
He sent a shaggy, tottered, staring slave, 
That when he speaks draws out his grisly beard 
And winds it twice or thrice about his ear, 
Whose face has been a grindstone for men's swords; 
His hands are hacked, some fingers cut quite off, 
Who when he speaks grunts like a hog, and looks 
Like one that is employed in Catzerie 
And cross biting; such a Rogue 
As is the husband to a hundred whores; 
And I by him must send three hundred crowns. 
Well, my hope is, he will not stay there still; 
And, when he comes: O that he were but here! 
'Tis not five hundred Crowns that I esteem. 
I am not moved at that. This angers me, 
That he who knows I love him as myself 
Should write in this imperious vein. Why, Sir, 
You know I have no child, and unto whom 
Should I leave all but unto Ithamore? 
'Twas sent me for a present from the great Cham. 
A nasty slave he is. Whither now, Fiddler? 
Pardonnez moi, Monsieur; me be no well.  
Farewell, Fiddler. One letter more to the Jew. 
Prithee, sweet love, one more, and write it sharp. 
No, I'll send by word of mouth now. Bid him 
deliver thee a thousand Crowns, by the same token, 
that the Nuns loved Rice, that friar Bernardine slept 
in his own clothes. Any of 'em will do it. 
Let me alone to urge it, now I know the meaning. 
The meaning has a meaning. Come, let's in. 
To undo a Jew is charity, and not sin.
Now, Gentlemen, betake you to your Arms, 
And see that Malta be well fortified. 
And it behooves you to be resolute, 
For Calymath, having hovered here so long, 
Will win the Town or die before the walls. 
And die he shall, for we will never yield. 
O, bring us to the Governor. 
Away with her! she is a Courtesan. 
Whate'er I am, yet, Governor, hear me speak. 
I bring thee news by whom thy son was slain. 
Mathias did it not: it was the Jew. 
Who, besides the slaughter of these Gentlemen, 
Poisoned his own daughter and the Nuns, 
Strangled a Friar, and I know not what 
Mischief beside.  Had we but proof of this... 
Strong proof, my Lord. his man's now at my Lodging 
That was his Agent, he'll confess it all. 
Go fetch him straight. I always feared that Jew. 
I'll go alone, dogs, do not hale me thus. 
One dram of powder more had made all sure. 
Make fires! heat irons! let the rack be fetched! 
Nay, stay, my Lord; 'tmay be he will confess. 
Confess? what mean you, Lords? who should confess? 
Thou and thy Turk; 'twas you that slew my son. 
Away with him! his sight is death to me. 
For what? you men of Malta, hear me speak. 
She is a Courtesan, and he a thief, 
And he my bondman. Let me have law, 
For none of this can prejudice my life. 
Once more, away with him! you shall have law. 
Devils, do your worst. I live in spite of you. 
As these have spoke, so be it to their souls! 
I hope the poisoned flowers will work anon.  
Was my Mathias murdered by the Jew? 
Ferneze, 'twas thy son that murdered him. 
Be patient, gentle Madam; it was he. 
He forged the daring challenge made them fight. 
Where is the Jew? where is that murderer? 
In prison, till the Law has passed on him. 
My lord, the Courtesan and her man are dead; 
So is the Turk and Barabas the Jew. 
Dead, my Lord, and here they bring his body. 
This sudden death of his is very strange. 
Wonder not at it, Sir; the heavens are just. 
Their deaths were like their lives; then think not of 'em. 
Since they are dead, let them be buried. 
For the Jew's body, throw that o'er the walls 
To be a prey for Vultures and wild beasts. 
So, now away and fortify the Town. 
What, all alone? well fare, sleepy drink! 
I'll be revenged on this accursed Town; 
For by my means Calymath shall enter in. 
I'll help to slay their children and their wives, 
To fire the Churches, pull their houses down, 
Take my goods too, and seize upon my lands. 
I hope to see the Governor a slave 
And, rowing in a Galley, whipped to death. 
Yes, my good Lord, one that can spy a place 
Where you may enter and surprise the Town. 
My name is Barabas; I am a Jew. 
Art thou that Jew whose goods we heard were sold 
For Tribute money?  The very same, my Lord. 
And since that time they have hired a slave, my man, 
To accuse me of a thousand villainies. 
I was imprisoned, but 'scaped their hands. 
I drank of Poppy and cold mandrake juice, 
And being asleep, belike they thought me dead 
And threw me o'er the walls. So, or how else, 
The Jew is here and rests at your command. 
'Twas bravely done. but tell me, Barabas, 
Canst thou, as thou report'st, make Malta ours? 
Fear not, my Lord; for here against the Sluice, 
The rock is hollow, and of purpose digged 
To make a passage for the running streams 
And common channels of the City. 
Now, whilst you give assault unto the walls, 
I'll lead five hundred soldiers through the Vault 
And rise with them i'th' middle of the Town, 
Open the gates for you to enter in, 
And by this means the City is your own. 
If this be true, I'll make thee Governor. 
And if it be not true, then let me die. 
Thou'st doomed thyself. - assault it presently. 
Now vail your pride, you captive Christians, 
And kneel for mercy to your conquering foe. 
Now where's the hope you had of haughty Spain? 
Ferneze, speak. Had it not been much better 
To have kept thy promise than be thus surprised? 
What should I say? we are captives, and must yield. 
Ay, villains, you must yield, and under Turkish 
yokes shall groaning bear the burden of our ire. 
And, Barabas, as erst we promised thee, 
For thy desert we make thee Governor. 
Use them at thy discretion.  Thanks, my Lord. 
O fatal day! to fall into the hands 
Of such a Traitor and unhallowed Jew! 
What greater misery could heaven inflict? 
'tis our command. And Barabas, we give, 
To guard thy person, these our Janizaries. 
Entreat them well, as we have used thee. 
And now, brave Bassoes, come. We'll walk about 
The ruined Town, and see the wrack we made. 
Farewell, brave Jew. Farewell, great Barabas. 
May all good fortune follow Calymath. 
And now, as entrance to our safety, 
To prison with the Governor and these 
Captains, his consorts and confederates. 
O villain, Heaven will be revenged on thee. 
Away! no more! let him not trouble me. 
Thus hast thou gotten, by the policy 
No simple place, no small authority. 
I now am Governor of Malta, true, 
But Malta hates me, and, in hating me 
My life's in danger. And what boots it thee, 
Poor Barabas, to be the Governor, 
Whenas thy life shall be at their command? 
No, Barabas, this must be looked into; 
And since by wrong thou got'st Authority, 
Maintain it bravely by firm policy; 
At least, unprofitably lose it not, 
For he that liveth in Authority, 
And neither gets him friends nor fills his bags, 
Lives like the Ass that Aesop speaketh of, 
That labors with a load of bread and wine 
And leaves it off to snap on Thistle tops. 
But Barabas will be more circumspect. 
Begin betimes; Occasion's bald behind. 
Slip not thine opportunity, for fear too late 
Thou seek'st for much, but canst not compass it. 
Within here! My Lord? Ay, Lord! thus slaves will learn. 
Now, Governor, - stand by there; wait within. 
This is the reason that I sent for thee: 
Thou seest thy life and Malta's happiness 
Are at my Arbitrement, and Barabas 
At his discretion may dispose of both. 
Now tell me, Governor, and plainly too, 
What think'st thou shall become of it and thee? 
This, Barabas: since things are in thy power, 
I see no reason but of Malta's wrack, 
Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty: 
Nor fear I death, nor will I flatter thee. 
Governor, good words. Be not so furious. 
'tis not thy life which can avail me aught; 
Yet you do live, and live for me you shall; 
And as for Malta's ruin, think you not 
'twere slender policy for Barabas 
To dispossess himself of such a place? 
For sith, as once you said, within this Isle, 
In Malta here, that I have got my goods, 
And in this City still have had success, 
And now at length am grown your Governor, 
Yourselves shall see it shall not be forgot; 
For, as a friend not known but in distress, 
I'll rear up Malta, now remediless. 
Will Barabas recover Malta's loss? 
What wilt thou give me, Governor, to procure 
A dissolution of the slavish Bands 
Wherein the Turk hath yoked your land and you? 
What will you give me if I render you 
The life of Calymath, surprise his men, 
And in an outhouse of the City shut 
His soldiers till I have consumed 'em all with fire? 
What will you give him that procureth this? 
Do but bring this to pass which thou pretendest, 
Deal truly with us as thou intimatest, 
And I will send amongst the Citizens 
And by my letters privately procure 
Great sums of money for thy recompense. 
Nay more, do this, and live thou Governor still. 
Nay, do thou this, Ferneze, and be free. 
Governor, I enlarge thee. Live with me. 
Go walk about the City; see thy friends. 
Tush, send not letters to 'em; go thyself, 
And let me see what money thou canst make. 
Here is my hand that I'll set Malta free; 
And thus we cast it: to a solemn feast 
I will invite young Selim Calymath. 
Where be thou present only to perform 
One stratagem that I'll impart to thee, 
Wherein no danger shall betide thy life, 
And I will warrant Malta free forever. 
Here is my hand. Believe me, Barabas, 
I will be there, and do as thou desirest. 
When is the time?  Governor, presently; 
For Calymath, when he hath viewed the Town, 
Will take his leave and sail toward Ottoman. 
Then will I, Barabas, about this coin, 
And bring it with me to thee in the evening. 
Do so, but fail not. Now farewell, Ferneze. 
And thus far roundly goes the business. 
Thus, loving neither, will I live with both, 
Making a profit of my policy, 
And he from whom my most advantage comes 
This is the life we Jews are used to lead - 
And reason too, for Christians do the like. 
Well, now about effecting this device: 
First to surprise great Selim's soldiers, 
And then to make provision for the feast, 
That at one instant all things may be done. 
My policy detests prevention. 
To what event my secret purpose drives 
I know - and they shall witness with their lives. 
Thus have we viewed the City, seen the sack, 
And caused the ruins to be new-repaired, 
Which with our Bombard's shot and Basilisk 
We rent in sunder at our entry. 
And now I see the Situation, 
And how secure this conquered island stands, 
Environed with the mediterranean Sea, 
Strong countermined with other petty Isles, 
And, toward Calabria, backed by Sicily, 
Where Syracusian Dionysius reigned, 
Two lofty Turrets that command the Town; 
I wonder how it could be conquered thus. 
From Barabas, Malta's Governor, I bring 
A message unto mighty Calymath. 
Hearing his Sovereign was bound for Sea, 
To sail to Turkey, to great Ottoman, 
He humbly would entreat your Majesty 
To come and see his homely Citadel 
And banquet with him ere thou leav'st the Isle. 
To banquet with him in his Citadel? 
I fear me, Messenger, to feast my train 
Within a Town of war so lately pillaged 
Will be too costly and too troublesome; 
Yet would I gladly visit Barabas, 
For well has Barabas deserved of us. 
Selim, for that, thus saith the Governor: 
That he hath in store a Pearl so big, 
So precious, and withal so orient, 
As, be it valued but indifferently, 
The price thereof will serve to entertain 
Selim and all his soldiers for a month. 
Therefore he humbly would entreat your Highness 
Not to depart till he has feasted you. 
I cannot feast my men in Malta walls, 
Except he place his Tables in the streets. 
Know, Selim, that there is a monastery 
Which standeth as an outhouse to the Town; 
There will he banquet them, but thee at home, 
With all thy Bassoes and brave followers. 
Well, tell the Governor we grant his suit. 
We'll in this summer evening feast with him. 
And now, bold Bassoes, let us to our tents, 
And meditate how we may grace us best 
To solemnize our Governor's great feast.  
In this, my Countrymen, be ruled by me. 
Have special care that no man sally forth 
Till you shall hear a Culverin discharged 
By him that bears the Linstock, kindled thus. 
Then issue out and come to rescue me, 
For happily I shall be in distress, 
Or you released of this servitude. 
Rather than thus to live as Turkish thralls, 
On, then; begone.  Farewell, grave Governor. 
How stand the cords? How hang these hinges, fast? 
Are all the Cranes and Pulleys sure?  All fast. 
Leave nothing loose, all leveled to my mind. 
Why, now I see that you have Art indeed. 
There, Carpenters, divide that gold amongst you. 
Go, swill in bowls of Sack and Muscadine. 
Down to the Cellar; taste of all my wines. 
We shall, my Lord, and thank you.  
And if you like them, drink your fill and die! 
For, so I live, perish may all the world! 
Now, Selim Calymath, return me word 
That thou wilt come, and I am satisfied. 
He will; and has commanded all his men 
To come ashore, and march through Malta streets, 
That thou mayst feast them in thy Citadel. 
Then now are all things as my wish would have 'em. 
There wanteth nothing but the Governor's pelf, 
And see, he brings it. Now Governor, the sum. 
With free consent, a hundred thousand pounds. 
For if I keep not promise, trust not me. 
And, Governor, now partake my policy: 
First, for his Army, they are sent before, 
Entered the Monastery, and underneath 
In several places are fieldpieces pitched, 
Bombards, whole Barrels full of Gunpowder, 
That on the sudden shall dissever it 
And batter all the stones about their ears, 
Whence none can possibly escape alive. 
Now, as for Calymath and his consorts, 
Here have I made a dainty Gallery, 
The floor whereof, this Cable being cut, 
Doth fall asunder, so that it doth sink 
Into a deep pit past recovery. 
Here, hold that knife. And when thou seest he comes 
And with his Bassoes shall be blithely set, 
A warning piece shall be shot off from the Tower, 
To give thee knowledge when to cut the cord 
And fire the house. Say, will not this be brave? 
O, excellent! here, hold thee, Barabas. 
I trust thy word; take what I promised thee. 
No, Governor. I'll satisfy thee first; 
Thou shalt not live in doubt of anything. 
Stand close, for here they come. Why, is not this 
A kingly kind of trade, to purchase Towns 
By treachery, and sell 'em by deceit? 
Now tell me, worldlings, underneath the sun 
If greater falsehood ever has been done? 
Come, my Companion Bassoes. See, I pray, 
How busy Barabas is there above 
To entertain us in his Gallery. 
Let us salute him. Save thee, Barabas! 
For I will show thee greater courtesy 
Than Barabas would have afforded thee. 
See his end first, and fly then if thou canst. 
O, help me, Selim! help me, Christians! 
Governor, why stand you all so pitiless? 
Should I in pity of thy plaints or thee, 
Accursed Barabas, base Jew, relent? 
No, thus I'll see thy treachery repaid, 
But wish thou hadst behaved thee otherwise. 
You will not help me, then?  No, villain, no. 
And, villains, know you cannot help me now. 
Then, Barabas, breathe forth thy latest fate, 
And in the fury of thy torments strive 
To end thy life with resolution. 
Know, Governor, 'twas I that slew thy son. 
I framed the challenge that did make them meet. 
Know, Calymath, I aimed thy overthrow, 
And had I but escaped this stratagem, 
I would have brought confusion on you all, 
Damned Christian dogs, and Turkish infidels! 
But now begins the extremity of heat 
To pinch me with intolerable pangs. 
Die, life! fly, soul! tongue, curse thy fill, and die! 
Tell me, you Christians, what doth this portend? 
This train he laid to have entrapped thy life. 
Now, Selim, note the unhallowed deeds of Jews. 
Thus he determined to have handled thee, 
But I have rather chose to save thy life. 
Was this the banquet he prepared for us? 
Let's hence, lest further mischief be pretended. 
Nay, Selim, stay; for, since we have thee here, 
We will not let thee part so suddenly. 
Besides, if we should let thee go, all's one, 
For with thy Galleys couldst thou not get hence, 
Without fresh men to rig and furnish them. 
Tush, Governor, take thou no care for that. 
And do attend my coming there by this. 
Why, heardst thou not the trumpet sound a charge? 
Yes, what of that?  Why, then the house was fired,
Blown up and all thy soldiers massacred. 
O, monstrous treason!  A Jew's courtesy; 
For he that did by treason work our fall 
By treason hath delivered thee to us. 
Know, therefore, till thy father hath made good 
The ruins done to Malta and to us, 
Thou canst not part. For Malta shall be freed, 
Or Selim ne'er return to Ottoman. 
Nay, rather, Christians, let me go to Turkey, 
In person there to mediate your peace. 
To keep me here will nought advantage you. 
Content thee, Calymath, here thou must stay, 
And live in Malta prisoner, for come all the world 
To rescue thee, so will we guard us now, 
As sooner shall they drink the Ocean dry 
Than conquer Malta or endanger us. 
So march away, and let due praise be given 
Neither to Fate nor Fortune, but to Heaven. 
<EDW2VS>
'My father is deceased. Come Gaveston,
And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend.'
Ah, words that make me surfeit with delight!
What greater bliss can hap to Gaveston
Than live and be the favorite of a king!
Sweet prince, I come! these, these thy amorous lines
Might have enforced me to have swum from France,
And, like Leander, gasped upon the sand,
So thou wouldst smile, and take me in thine arms.
The sight of London to my exiled eyes
Is as Elysium to a new-come soul:
Not that I love the city or the men,
But that it harbors him I hold so dear,
The king, upon whose bosom let me die,
And with the world be still at enmity.
What need the arctic people love starlight,
To whom the sun shines both by day and night?
Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers,
My knee shall bow to none but to the king.
It's for the multitude, that are but sparks,
Baked up in embers of their poverty,
Tantum! I'll fawn first on the wind
That glanceth at my lips, and flieth away.
A soldier, that hath served against the Scot.
Why, there are hospitals for such as you,
I have no war, and therefore, sir, be gone.
Farewell, and perish by a soldier's hand,
That wouldst reward them with an hospital!
Ay, ay, these words of his move me as much
As if a Goose should play the Porpentine
And dart her plumes, thinking to pierce my breast;
But yet it is no pain to speak men fair;
I'll flatter these, and make them live in hope.
You know that I came lately out of France,
And yet I have not viewed my Lord the king.
If I speed well, I'll entertain you all.
I have some business, leave me to myself.
I must have wanton Poets, pleasant wits,
Musicians, that with touching of a string
May draw the pliant king which way I please.
Music and poetry is his delight;
Therefore I'll have Italian masks by night,
Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows;
And in the day, when he shall walk abroad,
Like Sylvan Nymphs my pages shall be clad;
My men, like Satyrs grazing on the lawns,
Shall with their Goat feet dance the antic hay.
Sometime a lovely boy in Dian's shape,
With hair the gilds the water as it glides,
Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,
And in his sportful hands an Olive tree,
To hide those parts which men delight to see,
Shall bathe him in a spring; and there, hard by,
One like Actaeon, peeping through the grove,
Shall by the angry goddess be transformed,
And running in the likeness of an Hart,
By yelping hounds pulled down, shall seem to die:
Such things as these best please his majesty,
My lord. Here comes the king and the nobles
From the parliament. I'll stand aside.
That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor.
Will you not grant me this? in spite of them
I'll have my will; and these two Mortimers,
That cross me thus, shall know I am displeased.
If you love us, my lord, hate Gaveston.
That villain Mortimer! I'll be his death.
Mine uncle here, this Earl, and I myself,
Were sworn to your father at his death,
That he should ne'er return into the realm:
And know, my lord, ere I will break my oath,
This sword of mine, that should offend your foes,
Shall sleep within the scabbard at thy need,
And underneath thy banners march who will,
For Mortimer will hang his armor up.
Well, Mortimer, I'll make thee rue these words.
Beseems it thee to contradict thy king?
Frown'st thou thereat, aspiring Lancaster?
The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows,
And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff.
I will have Gaveston; and you shall know
What danger 'tis to stand against your king.
My lord, why do you thus incense your peers,
That naturally would love and honor you,
But for that base and obscure Gaveston?
Four Earldoms have I, besides Lancaster,
Derby, Salisbury, Lincoln, Leicester;
These will I sell, to give my soldiers pay,
Ere Gaveston shall stay within the realm,
Therefore, if he be come, expel him straight.
Barons and Earls, your pride hath made me mute;
But now I'll speak, and to the proof, I hope.
I do remember, in my father's days,
Lord Percy of the North, being highly moved,
Braved Mowbray in presence of the king;
For which, had not his highness loved him well,
He should have lost his head; but with his look
The undaunted spirit of Percy was appeased,
And Mowbray and he were reconciled:
Yet dare you brave the king unto his face.
Brother, revenge it, and let these their heads
Preach upon poles, for trespass of their tongues.
Ay, yours; and therefore I would wish you grant.
Bridle thy anger, gently Mortimer.
I cannot, nor I will not; I must speak.
Cousin, our hands I hope shall fence our heads,
And strike off his that makes you threaten us.
Come, uncle, let us leave the brain-sick king,
And henceforth parley with our naked swords.
Wiltshire hath men enough to save our heads.
All Warwickshire will leave him for my sake.
And Northward Lancaster hath many friends.
Adieu, my Lord; and either change your mind,
Or look to see the throne, where you should sit,
To float in blood, and at thy wanton head
The glozing head of thy base minion thrown.
I cannot brook these haughty menaces:
Am I a king, and must be overruled?
Brother, display my ensigns in the field:
I'll bandy with the Barons and the Earls,
And either die or live with Gaveston.
I can no longer keep me from my lord.
What, Gaveston, welcome, kiss not my hand;
Embrace me, Gaveston, as I do thee.
Why shouldst thou kneel? know'st thou not who I am?
Thy friend, thyself, another Gaveston.
Not Hylas was more mourned of Hercules
Than thou hast been of me since thy exile.
And, since I went from hence, no soul in hell
Hath felt more torment than poor Gaveston.
I know it. Brother, welcome home my friend.
Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire,
And that high-minded earl of Lancaster:
I have my wish, in that I joy thy sight;
And sooner shall the sea o'erwhelm my land
Than bear the ship that shall transport thee hence.
I here create thee Lord high Chamberlain,
Chief Secretary to the state and me,
Earl of Cornwall, king and lord of Man.
My lord, these titles far exceed my worth.
Brother, the least of these may well suffice
For one of greater birth than Gaveston.
Cease, brother, for I cannot brook these words.
Thy worth, sweet friend, is far above my gifts:
Therefore, to equal it, receive my heart.
If for these dignities thou be envied,
I'll give thee more, for but to honor thee
Is Edward pleased with kingly regiment.
Fear'st thou thy person? thou shalt have a guard:
Want'st thou gold? go to my treasury:
Wouldst thou be loved and feared? receive my seal,
Save or condemn, and in our name command
Whatso thy mind affects or fancy likes.
It shall suffice me to enjoy your love,
Which whiles I have, I think myself as great
As Caesar riding in the Roman street,
With captive kings at his triumphant Car.
Whither goes my lord of coventry so fast?
To celebrate your father's exequies.
But is that wicked Gaveston returned?
Ay, priest, and lives to be revenged on thee,
That wert the only cause of his exile.
'tis true; and, but for reverence of these robes,
Thou shouldst not plod one foot beyond this place.
I did no more than I was bound to do:
And, Gaveston, unless thou be reclaimed,
As then I did incense the parliament,
So will I now, and thou shalt back to France.
Saving your reverence, you must pardon me.
Throw off his golden mitre, rend his stole,
And in the channel christen him anew.
Ah, brother, lay not violent hands on him,
For he'll complain unto the see of Rome.
Let him complain unto the see of hell!
I'll be revenged on him for my exile.
No, spare his life, but seize upon his goods:
Be thou lord bishop, and receive his rents,
And make him serve thee as thy chaplain.
I give him thee; here, use him as thou wilt.
He shall to prison, and there die in bolts.
Ay, to the tower, the fleet, or where thou wilt.
For this offense be thou accursed of god!
Who's there? convey this priest to the tower.
But in the mean time, Gaveston, away,
And take possession of his house and goods.
Come, follow me, and thou shalt have my guard
To see it done, and bring thee safe again.
What should a priest do with so fair a house?
A prison may beseem his holiness.
'Tis true, the Bishop is in the tower,
And goods and body given to Gaveston.
What! will they tyrannize upon the Church?
Ah, wicked king! accursed Gaveston!
This ground, which is corrupted with their steps,
Shall be their timeless sepulchre or mine.
Well, let that peevish Frenchman guard him sure;
Unless his breast be swordproof, he shall die.
How now! why droops the earl of Lancaster?
Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent?
That villain Gaveston is made an Earl.
Ay, and besides lord Chamberlain of the realm,
And secretary too, and lord of Man.
We may not nor we will not suffer this.
Why post we not from hence to levy men?
"My lord of Cornwall" now at every word;
And happy is the man whom he vouchsafes,
For vailing of his bonnet, one good look.
Thus, arm in arm, the king and he doth march:
Nay, more, the guard upon his lordship waits,
And all the court begins to flatter him.
Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king,
He nods, and scorns, and smiles at those that pass.
Doth no man take exceptions at the slave?
All stomach him, but none dares speak a word.
Ah, that bewrays their baseness, Lancaster!
Were all the Earls and Barons of my mind,
We'd hale him from the bosom of the king,
And at the court gate hang the peasant up,
Who, swoll'n with venom of ambitious pride,
Will be the ruin of the realm and us.
Here comes my lord of Canterbury's grace.
His countenance bewrays he is displeased.
First, were his sacred garments rent and torn;
Then laid they violent hands upon him; next,
Himself imprisoned, and his goods asseized.
This certify the Pope: away, take horse.
My lord, will you take arms against the king?
What need I? God himself is up in arms
When violence is offered to the church.
Then will you join with us, that be his peers,
To banish or behead that Gaveston?
What else, my lords? for it concerns me near;
The Bishopric of Coventry is his.
Madam, whither walks your majesty so fast?
Unto the forest, gentle Mortimer,
To live in grief and baleful discontent;
For now my lord the king regards me not,
But dotes upon the love of Gaveston.
He claps his cheeks and hangs about his neck,
Smiles in his face, and whispers in his ears;
And, when I come, he frowns, as who should say,
"Go whither thou wilt, seeing I have Gaveston."
Is it not strange that he is thus bewitched?
Madam, return unto the court again.
That sly inveigling Frenchman we'll exile,
Or lose our lives; and yet, ere that day come,
The king shall lose his crown; for we have power,
And courage too, to be revenged at full.
But yet lift not your swords against the king.
No; but we'll lift Gaveston from hence.
And war must be the means, or he'll stay still.
Then let him stay; for, rather than my lord
Shall be oppressed by civil mutinies,
I will endure a melancholy life,
And let him frolic with his minion.
My lords, to ease all this, but hear me speak:
We and the rest, that are his counsellors,
Will meet, and with a general consent
Confirm his banishment with our hands and seals.
What we confirm the king will frustrate.
Then may we lawfully revolt from him.
Buy say, my lord, where shall this meeting be?
And in the mean time, I'll entreat you all
To cross to Lambeth, and there stay with me.
Come, then, let's away.   Madam, farewell.
Farewell, sweet Mortimer, and, for my sake,
Forbear to levy arms against the king.
Ay, if words will serve; if not, I must.
Edmund, the mighty prince of Lancaster,
That hath more earldoms than an ass can bear,
And both the Mortimers, two goodly men,
With Guy of Warwick, that redoubted knight,
Are gone towards lambeth. There let them remain.
Here is the form of Gaveston's exile;
May it please your lordship to subscribe your name.
Quick, quick, my lord; I long to write my name.
But I long more to see him banished hence.
The name of Mortimer shall fright the king,
Unless he be declined from that base peasant.
What? are you moved that Gaveston sits here?
It is our pleasure; we will have it so.
Your grace doth well to place him by your side,
For nowhere else the new earl is so safe.
What man of noble birth can brook this sight?
See what a scornful look the peasant casts.
Can kingly Lions fawn on creeping Ants?
Ignoble vassal, that, like Phaeton,
Aspir'st unto the guidance of the sun!
Their downfall is at hand, their forces down:
We will not thus be faced and overpeered.
Is this the duty that you owe your king?
We know our duties; let him know his peers.
Whither will you bear him? stay, or ye shall die.
We are no traitors; therefore threaten not.
No, threaten not, my lord, but pay them home.
Thou, villain! wherefore talk'st thou of a king,
That hardly art a gentleman by birth?
Were he a peasant, being my minion,
I'll make the proudest of you stoop to him.
My lord, you may not thus disparage us.
Away, I say, with hateful Gaveston!
And with the earl of Kent that favors him.
Nay, then, lay violent hands upon your king!
Here, Mortimer, sit thou in Edward's throne;
Warwick and Lancaster, wear you my crown.
Was ever king thus overruled as I?
Learn, then, to rule us better, and the realm.
What we have done, our heart blood shall maintain.
Think you that we can brook this upstart pride?
Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech.
Why are you moved? be patient, my lord,
And see what we your counsellors have done.
My lords, now let us all be resolute,
And either have our wills, or lose our lives.
Meet you for this, proud overdaring peers?
Ere my sweet Gaveston shall part from me,
This isle shall fleet upon the Ocean,
And wander to the unfrequented inde.
You know that I am legate to the Pope;
On your allegiance to the see of Rome,
Subscribe, as we have done, to his exile.
Curse him, if he refuse; and then may we
Depose him, and elect another king.
Ay, there it goes! but yet I will not yield:
Curse me, depose me, do the worst you can.
Then linger not, my lord, but do it straight.
Remember how the Bishop was abused.
Either banish him that was the cause thereof,
Or I will presently discharge these lords
Of duty and allegiance due to thee.
It boots me not to threat; I must speak fair:
The Legate of the Pope will be obeyed.
My lord, you shall be Chancellor of the realm;
Thou, Lancaster, high admiral of our fleet;
Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls;
And you, lord Warwick, president of the North;
And thou of Wales. If this content you not,
Make several kingdoms of this monarchy,
And share it equally amongst you all,
So I may have some nook or corner left
To frolic with my dearest Gaveston.
Nothing shall alter us; we are resolved.
Why should you love him whom the world hates so?
Because he loves me more than all the world.
Ah, none but rude and savage minded men
Would seek the ruin of my Gaveston,
You that be noble-born should pity him.
You that are princely born should shake him off:
For shame, subscribe, and let the lown depart.
Are you content to banish him the realm?
I see I must, and therefore am content:
Instead of ink, I'll write it with my tears.
The king is lovesick for his minion.
'Tis done: and now, accursed hand, fall off!
Give it me: I'll have it published in the streets.
I'll see him presently dispatched away.
Now is my heart at ease. And so is mine.
This will be good news to the common sort.
Be it or no, he shall not linger here.
How fast they run to banish him I love!
They would not stir, were it to do me good.
Why should a king be subject to a priest?
Proud Rome, that hatchest such imperial grooms,
With these thy superstitious taper-lights,
Wherewith thy anti-christian churches blaze,
I'll fire thy crazed buildings, and enforce
The papal towers to kiss the lowly ground,
With slaughtered priests make Tiber's channel swell,
And banks raised higher with their sepulchres!
As for the peers, that back the clergy thus,
If I be king, not one of them shall live.
My lord, I hear it whispered everywhere,
That I am banished and must fly the land.
'Tis true, sweet Gaveston; o, were it false!
The Legate of the Pope will have it so,
And thou must hence, or I shall be deposed.
But I will reign to be revenged of them;
And therefore, sweet friend, take it patiently.
Live where thou wilt, I'll send thee gold enough;
And long thou shall not stay; or, if thou dost,
I'll come to thee; my love shall ne'er decline.
Is all my hope turned to this hell of grief?
Rend not my heart with thy too piercing words:
Thou from this land, I from myself am banished.
To go from hence grieves not poor Gaveston;
But to forsake you, in whose gracious looks
The blessedness of Gaveston remains;
For nowhere else seeks he felicity.
And only this torments my wretched soul,
That, whether I will or no, thou must depart.
Be governor of Ireland in my stead,
And there abide till fortune call thee home.
Here, take my picture, and let me wear thine.
O, might I keep thee here, as I do this,
Happy were I, but now most miserable.
'Tis something to be pitied of a king.
Thou shalt not hence; I'll hide thee, Gaveston.
I shall be found, and then 'twill grieve me more.
Kind words and mutual talk makes our grief greater.
Therefore, with dumb embracement, let us part.
Stay, Gaveston; I cannot leave thee thus.
For every look, my love drops down a tear:
Seeing I must go, do not renew my sorrow.
The time is little that thou hast to stay,
And, therefore, give me leave to look my fill.
But, come, sweet friend; I'll bear thee on thy way.
I pass not for their anger. Come, let's go:
O, that we might as well return as go!
Fawn not on me, French strumpet; get thee gone!
On whom but on my husband, should I fawn?
On Mortimer; with whom, ungentle Queen ...
I say no more, judge you the rest, my lord.
In saying this, thou wrong'st me, Gaveston:
Is't not enough that thou corrupt'st my lord,
And art a bawd to his affections,
But thou must call mine honor thus in question?
I mean not so; you grace must pardon me.
Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer,
And by thy means is Gaveston exiled,
But I would wish thee reconcile the lords,
Or thou shalt ne'er be reconciled to me.
Your highness knows, it lies not in my power.
Away, then! touch me not. Come, Gaveston.
Villain, 'tis thou that robb'st me of my lord.
Madam, 'tis you that rob me of my lord.
Speak not unto her: let her droop and pine.
Wherein, my lord, have I deserved these words?
Witness the tears that Isabella sheds,
Witness this heart, that, sighing for thee, breaks,
How dear my lord is to poor Isabel!
And witness heaven how dear thou art to me:
There weep; for, till my Gaveston be repealed,
Assure thyself thou com'st not in my sight.
O miserable and distressed queen!
Would, when I left sweet France, and was embarked,
That charming Circe, walking on the waves,
Had changed my shape, or at the marriage day
The cup of Hymen had been full of poison,
Or with those arms, that twined about my neck
I had been stifled, and not lived to see
The king my lord thus to abandon me!
Like frantic Juno will I fill the earth
With ghastly murmur of my sighs and cries;
For never doted Jove on Ganymede
So much as he on cursed Gaveston:
But that will more exasperate his wrath;
I must entreat him, I must speak him fair,
And be a means to call home Gaveston:
And yet he'll ever dote on Gaveston;
And so am I forever miserable.
Look where the sister of the king of France
Sits wringing of her hands and beats her breast!
The king I fear, hath ill entreated her.
Hard is the heart that injures such a saint.
I know 'tis long of Gaveston she weeps.
Why? he is gone. Madam, how fares your grace?
Ah, Mortimer, now breaks the king's hate forth,
And he confesseth that he loves me not!
Cry quittance, Madam, then, and love not him.
No, rather will I die a thousand deaths,
And yet I love in vain; he'll ne'er love me.
Fear ye not, Madam; now his minion's gone,
His wanton humor will be quickly left.
O, never, Lancaster! I am enjoined
To sue unto you all for his repeal:
This wills my lord, and this must I perform,
Or else be banished from his highness' presence.
For his repeal? Madam! he comes not back,
Unless the sea cast up his shipwracked body.
And to behold so sweet a sight as that,
There's none here but would run his horse to death.
But, madam, would you have us call him home?
Ay, Mortimer, for, till he be restored,
The angry king hath banished me the court;
And, therefore, as thou lov'st and tender'st me,
Be thou my advocate unto these peers.
What, would you have me plead for Gaveston?
Plead for him he that will, I am resolved.
And so am I, my lord. Dissuade the Queen.
O, Lancaster, let him dissuade the king,
For 'tis against my will he should return.
Then speak not for him; let the peasant go.
'Tis for myself I speak, and not for him.
No speaking will prevail; and therefore cease.
Fair Queen, forbear to angle for the fish
Which, being caught, strikes him that takes it dead;
I mean that vile Torpedo, Gaveston,
That now, I hope, floats on the irish seas.
Sweet Mortimer, sit down by me a while,
And I will tell thee reasons of such weight
As thou wilt soon subscribe to his repeal.
It is impossible: but speak your mind.
Then thus; but none shall hear it but ourselves.
My Lords, albeit the Queen win Mortimer,
Will you be resolute and hold with me?
Not I, against my nephew.
Fear not; the queen's words cannot alter him.
No? do but mark how earnestly she pleads!
And see how coldly his looks make denial!
She smiles: now, for my life, his mind is changed!
I'll rather lose his friendship, I, than grant.
Well, of necessity it must be so.
My Lords, that I abhor base Gaveston
I hope your honors make no question,
And therefore, though I plead for his repeal,
'tis not for his sake, but for our avail;
Nay, for the realm's behoof, and for the king's.
Fie, Mortimer, dishonor not thyself!
Can this be true, 'twas good to banish him?
And is this true, to call him home again?
Such reasons make white black, and dark night day.
My Lord of Lancaster, mark the respect.
In no respect can contraries be true.
Yet, good my lord, hear what he can allege.
All that he speaks is nothing; we are resolved.
Do you not wish that Gaveston were dead?
Why then, my lord, give me but leave to speak.
But, nephew, do not play the sophister.
This which I urge is of a burning zeal
To mend the king and do our country good.
Know you not Gaveston hath store of gold,
Which may in Ireland purchase him such friends
As he will front the mightiest of us all?
And whereas he shall live and be beloved,
'Tis hard for us to work his overthrow.
Mark you but that, my lord of Lancaster.
But, were he here, detested as he is,
How easily might some base slave be suborned
To greet his lordship with a poniard,
And none so much as blame the murderer,
But rather praise him for that brave attempt,
And in the Chronicle enroll his name
For purging of the realm of such a plague!
Ay, but how chance this was not done before?
Because, my lords, it was not thought upon;
Nay, more, when he shall know it lies in us
To banish him, and then to call him home,
'Twill make him vail the top flag of his pride,
And fear to offend the meanest nobleman.
Then may we with some color rise in arms;
For, howsoever we have borne it out,
'Tis treason to be up against the king.
So shall we have the people of our side,
Which, for his father's sake lean to the king,
But cannot brook a night-grown mushrump,
Such a one as my Lord of Cornwall is,
Should bear us down of the nobility.
And, when the commons and the nobles join,
'Tis not the king can buckler Gaveston.
We'll pull him from the strongest hold he hath.
My lords, if to perform this I be slack,
Think me as base a groom as Gaveston.
On that condition Lancaster will grant.
And so will Pembroke and I. And I.
In this I count me highly gratified,
And Mortimer will rest at your command.
And when this favor Isabel forgets,
Then let her live abandoned and forlorn.
But see, in happy time, my lord the king,
Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way,
Is new returned. This news will glad him much:
Yet not so much as me. I love him more
Than he can Gaveston: would he loved me
But half so much! then were I treble blest.
He's gone, and for his absence thus I mourn.
Did never sorrow go so near my heart
As doth the want of my sweet Gaveston?
And, could my crown's revenue bring him back,
I would freely give it to his enemies,
And think I gained, having bought so dear a friend.
Hark, how he harps upon his minion!
My heart is as an anvil unto sorrow,
Which beats upon it like the Cyclops' hammers,
And with the noise turns up my giddy brain,
And makes me frantic for my Gaveston.
Ah, had some bloodless fury rose from hell,
And with my kingly sceptre struck me dead,
When I was forced to leave my Gaveston!
Diablo, what passions call you these?
My gracious lord, I come to bring you news.
That you have parled with your Mortimer?
That Gaveston, my Lord, shall be repealed.
Repealed! the news is too sweet to be true.
But will you love me, if you find it so?
If it be so, what will not Edward do?
For Gaveston, but not for Isabel.
For thee, fair Queen, if thou lovest Gaveston,
I'll hang a golden tongue about thy neck,
Seeing thou hast pleaded with so good success.
No other jewels hang about my neck
Than these, my lord; nor let me have more wealth
Than I may fetch from this rich treasury.
O, how a kiss revives poor Isabel!
Once more receive my hand; and let this be
A second marriage 'twixt thyself and me.
And may it prove more happy than the first!
My gentle lord, bespeak these nobles fair,
That wait attendance for a gracious look,
And on their knees salute your majesty.
Courageous Lancaster, embrace thy king;
And, as gross vapors perish by the sun,
Even so let hatred with thy sovereign's smile:
Live thou with me as my companion.
This salutation overjoys my heart.
Warwick shall be my chiefest counsellor.
These silver hairs will more adorn my court
Than gaudy silks or rich embroidery.
Chide me, sweet Warwick, if I go astray.
Slay me, my lord, when I offend your grace.
In solemn triumphs and in public shows
Pembroke shall bear the sword before the king.
And with this sword Pembroke will fight for you.
But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside?
Be thou commander of our royal fleet;
Or if that lofty office like thee not,
I make thee here lord Marshal of the realm.
My lord, I'll marshal so your enemies,
As England shall be quiet, and you safe.
And as for you, lord Mortimer of Chirke,
Whose great achievements in our foreign war
Deserve no common place nor mean reward,
Be you the general of the levied troops
That now are ready to assail the Scots.
In this your grace hath highly honored me,
For with my nature war doth best agree.
Now is the king of England rich and strong,
Having the love of his renowned peers.
Ay, Isabel, ne'er was my heart so light.
Clerk of the crown, direct our warrant forth,
For Gaveston, to Ireland! Beaumont fly,
As fast as Iris or Jove's Mercury.
It shall be done, my gracious Lord.
Lord Mortimer, we leave you to your charge.
Now let us in, and feast it royally.
Against our friend the earl of Cornwall comes
We'll have a general tilt and tournament;
And then his marriage shall be solemnized;
For wot you not that I have made him sure
Unto our cousin, the earl of Gloucester's heir?
Such news we hear, my lord.
That day, if not for him, yet for my sake,
Who in the triumph will be challenger,
Spare for no cost; we will requite your love.
In this or aught your highness shall command us.
Thanks, gentle Warwick. Come, let's in and revel.
Nephew, I must to Scotland: thou stayest here.
Leave now to oppose thyself against the king:
Thou seest by nature he is mild and calm;
And seeing his mind so dotes on Gaveston,
Let him without controlment have his will.
The mightiest kings have had their minions
Great Alexander loved Hephaestion,
The conquering Hercules for Hylas wept,
And for Patroclus stern Achilles drooped:
And not kings only, but the wisest men;
The Roman Tully loved Octavius,
Grave Socrates wild Alcibiades.
Then let his grace, whose youth is flexible,
And promiseth as much as we can wish,
Freely enjoy that vain lightheaded earl;
For riper years will wean him from such toys.
Uncle, his wanton humor grieves not me;
But this I scorn, that one so basely born
Should by his sovereign's favor grow so pert,
And riot it with the treasure of the realm,
While soldiers mutiny for want of pay.
He wears a lord's revenue on his back,
And, Midaslike, he jets it in the court,
With base outlandish cullions at his heels,
Whose proud fantastic liveries make such show
As if that Proteus, god of shapes, appeared.
I have not seen a dapper jack so brisk.
He wears a short Italian hooded cloak,
Larded with pearl, and in his tuscan cap
A jewel of more value than the crown.
While others walk below, the king and he,
From out a window, laugh at such as we,
And flout our train, and jest at our attire.
Uncle, 'tis this that makes me impatient.
But, nephew, now you see the king is changed.
Then so am I, and live to do him service:
But, while I have a sword, a hand, a heart,
I will not yield to any such upstart.
You know my mind: come, uncle, let's away. 
Which of the nobles dost thou mean to serve?
Not Mortimer, nor any of his side,
Because the king and he are enemies.
Baldock, learn this of me: a factious lord
Shall hardly do himself good, much less us;
But he that hath the favor of a king
May with one word advance us while we live.
The liberal earl of Cornwall is the man
On whose good fortune Spencer's hope depends.
What, mean you, then, to be his follower?
No, his companion; for he loves me well,
And would have once preferred me to the King.
But he is banished; there's small hope of him.
Ay, for a while; but, Baldock, mark the end.
A friend of mine told me in secrecy
That he's repealed and sent for back again;
And even now a post came from the court
With letters to our lady from the king;
And, as she read, she smiled; which makes me think
It is about her lover Gaveston.
'tis like enough; for, since he was exiled,
She neither walks abroad nor comes in sight.
But I had thought the match had been broke off,
And that his banishment had changed her mind.
Our Lady's first love is not wavering;
My life for thine, she will have Gaveston.
Then hope I by her means to be preferred,
Having read unto her since she was a child.
Then, Baldock, you must cast the scholar off,
And learn to court it like a Gentleman.
'Tis not a black coat and a little band,
A Velvet caped cloak, faced before with Serge,
And smelling to a Nosegay all the day,
Or holding of a napkin in your hand,
Or saying a long grace at a table's end,
Or making low legs to a nobleman,
Or looking downward, with your eyelids close,
And saying, "truly, an't may please your honor,"
Can get you any favor with great men:
You must be proud, bold, pleasant, resolute,
And now and then stab, as occasion serves.
Spencer, thou knowest I hate such formal toys,
And use them but of mere hypocrisy.
Mine old lord whiles he lived, was so precise,
That he would take exceptions at my buttons,
And being like pins' heads, blame me for the bigness,
Which made me curate-like in mine attire,
Though inwardly licentious enough,
And apt for any kind of villainy.
I am none of these common pedants I,
That cannot speak without propterea quod.
But one of those that saith quandoquidem,
And hath a special gift to form a verb.
Leave of this jesting, here my lady comes.
The grief for his exile was not so much,
As is the joy of his returning home.
This letter came from my sweet Gaveston.
What need'st thou love, thus to excuse thyself?
I know thou couldst not come and visit me.
'I will not long be from thee though I die:'
This argues the entire love of my Lord.
'When I forsake thee, death seize on my heart,'
But rest thee here where Gaveston shall sleep.
Now to the letter of my Lord the King.
He wills me to repair unto the court,
And meet my Gaveston. Why do I stay,
Seeing that he talks thus of my marriage day?
See that my coach be ready, I must hence.
And meet me at the park pale presently.
Spencer, stay you and bear me company,
For I have joyful news to tell thee of.
My lord of Cornwall is a coming over,
And will be at the court as soon as we.
I knew the King would have him home again.
If all things sort out, as I hope they will,
Thy service, Spencer, shall be thought upon.
I humbly thank your Ladyship.
Come lead the way, I long till I am there.
The wind is good, I wonder why he stays,
I fear me he is wracked upon the sea.
Look Lancaster how passionate he is,
And still his mind runs on his minion.
How now, what news? is Gaveston arrived?
Nothing but Gaveston! what means your grace?
You have matters of more weight to think upon,
The King of France sets foot in Normandy.
A trifle! we'll expel him when we please.
But tell me Mortimer, what's thy device,
Against the stately triumph we decreed?
A homely one my lord, not worth the telling.
But seeing you are so desirous, thus it is:
A lofty Cedar tree fair flourishing,
On whose top branches Kingly Eagles perch,
And by the bark a canker creeps me up,
And gets unto the highest bough of all.
And what is yours, my lord of Lancaster?
My lord, mine's more obscure than Mortimer's.
Pliny reports, there is a flying Fish,
Which all the other fishes deadly hate,
And therefore being pursued, it takes the air:
No sooner is it up, but there's a fowl
That seizeth it: this fish, my lord, I bear,
The motto this: Undique mors est.
Proud Mortimer, ungentle Lancaster,
Is this the love you bear your sovereign?
Is this the fruit your reconcilement bears?
Can you in words make show of amity,
And in your shields display your rancorous minds?
What call you this but private libelling
Against the Earl of Cornwall and my brother?
Sweet husband, be content; they all love you.
They love me not that hate my Gaveston.
I am that Cedar; shake me not too much;
And you the Eagles, soar ye ne'er so high,
I have the jesses that will pull you down;
And Aeque tandem shall that canker cry
Unto the proudest peer of Brittany.
Thou that compar'st him to a flying Fish,
And threaten'st death whether he rise or fall,
'Tis not the hugest monster of the sea,
Nor foulest Harpy, that shall swallow him.
If in his absence thus he favors him,
What will he do whenas he shall be present?
That shall we see: look, where his lordship comes!
Welcome to Tynemouth! welcome to thy friend!
Thy absence made me droop and pine away;
For, as the lovers of fair Danae,
When she was locked up in a brazen tower,
Desired her more, and waxed outrageous,
So did it sure with me: and now thy sight
Is sweeter far than was thy parting hence
Bitter and irksome to my sobbing heart.
Sweet Lord and King, your speech preventeth mine;
Yet have I words left to express my joy:
The shepherd, nipped with biting winter's rage,
Frolics not more to see the painted spring
Than I do to behold your Majesty.
Will none of you salute my Gaveston?
Salute him? yes. Welcome, Lord Chamberlain!
Welcome is the good Earl of Cornwall!
Welcome, Lord governor of the Isle of Man!
Still will these Earls and Barons use me thus?
My Lord, I cannot brook these injuries.
Ay me, poor soul, when these begin to jar!
Return it to their throats; I'll be thy warrant.
Base, leaden Earls, that glory in your birth,
Go sit at home, and eat your tenants' beef;
And come not here to scoff at Gaveston,
Whose mounting thoughts did never creep so low
As to bestow a look on such as you.
Yet I disdain not to do this for you.
Treason, treason! where's the traitor?
Convey hence Gaveston; they'll murder him.
The life of thee shall salve this foul disgrace.
Villain, thy life unless I miss mine aim.
Ah, furious Mortimer, what hast thou done?
No more than I would answer, were he slain.
Yes, more than thou canst answer, though he live;
Dear shall you both aby this riotous deed.
Out of my presence! come not near the court.
I'll not be barred the court for Gaveston.
We'll hale him by the ears unto the block.
Look to your own heads; his is sure enough.
Look to your own crown, if you back him thus.
Warwick, these words do ill beseem thy years.
Nay, all of them conspire to cross me thus;
But, if I live, I'll tread upon their heads,
That think with high looks thus to tread me down.
Come, Edmund, let's away, and levy men;
'Tis war that must abate these Barons' pride.
Let's to our castles, for the king is moved.
Moved may he be, and perish in his wrath!
Cousin, it is no dealing with him now;
He means to make us stoop by force of arms:
And therefore let us jointly here protest
To prosecute that Gaveston to the death.
By heaven, the abject villain shall not live!
I'll have his blood, or die in seeking it.
The like oath Pembroke takes. And so doth Lancaster.
Now send our Heralds to defy the King;
And make the people swear to put him down.
Why, how now, cousin, how fare all our friends?
My uncle's taken prisoner by the Scots.
We'll have him ransomed, man, be of good cheer.
They rate his ransom at five thousand pound.
Who should defray the money but the King,
Seeing he is taken prisoner in his wars?
Do, cousin, and I'll bear thee company.
Meantime my lord of Pembroke and myself
Will to Newcastle here, and gather head.
About it, then, and we will follow you.
Be resolute and full of secrecy.
Cousin, and if he will not ransom him,
I'll thunder such a peal into his ears
As never subject did unto his King.
Content; I'll bear my part. Holla, who's there?
Ay, marry, such a guard as this doth well.
Lead on the way. Whither will your lordships?
His highness is disposed to be alone.
Why, so he may; but we will speak to him.
You may not in, my lord.  May we not?
Nay, stay, my lord; I come to bring you news;
Mine uncle's taken prisoner by the Scots.
What, Mortimer, you will not threaten him?
Quiet yourself, you shall have the broad seal,
To gather for him throughout the realm.
Your minion Gaveston hath taught you this.
My lord, the family of the Mortimers
Are not so poor, but, would they sell their land
'Twould levy men enough to anger you.
We never beg, but use such prayers as these.
Nay, now you are here alone, I'll speak my mind.
And so will I; and then, my lord, farewell.
The idle triumphs, masks, lascivious shows,
And prodigal gifts bestowed on Gaveston,
Have drawn thy treasure dry, and made thee weak;
The murmuring commons overstretched hath.
Look for rebellion, look to be deposed.
Thy garrisons are beaten out of France,
And, lame and poor, lie groaning at the gates;
The wild O'Neil, with swarms of Irish kerns,
Lives uncontrolled within the English pale;
Unto the walls of York the Scots make road,
And, unresisted, draw away rich spoils.
The haughty Dane commands the narrow seas,
While in the harbor ride thy ships unrigged.
What foreign prince sends thee ambassadors?
Who loves thee, but a sort of flatterers?
Thy gentle Queen, sole sister to Valois,
Complains that thou hast left her all forlorn.
Thy court is naked, being bereft of those
That make a king seem glorious to the world,
I mean the peers, whom thou shouldst dearly love;
Libels are cast again thee in the street;
Ballads and rhymes made of thy overthrow.
The Northern borderers, seeing the houses burnt,
Their wives and children slain, run up and down,
Cursing the name of thee and Gaveston.
When wert thou in the field with banner spread?
But once, and then thy soldiers marched like players,
With garish robes, not armor; and thyself,
Bedaubed with gold, rode laughing at the rest,
Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest,
Where women's favors hung like labels down.
And thereof came it that the fleering Scots,
To England's high disgrace, have made this jig;
Maids of England, sore may you mourn,
For your lemans you have lost at Bannocksbourn,
Wigmore shall fly to set my uncle free.
And, when 'tis gone, our swords shall purchase more.
If ye be moved, revenge it as you can:
Look next to see us with our ensigns spread.
My swelling heart for very anger breaks.
How oft have I been baited by these peers,
And dare not be revenged, for their power is great;
Yet, shall the crowing of these cockerels
Affright a Lion? Edward, unfold thy paws,
And let their lives' blood slake thy fury's hunger.
If I be cruel and grow tyrannous,
Now let them thank themselves, and rue too late.
My lord, I see your love to Gaveston
Will be the ruin of the realm and you,
For now the wrathful nobles threaten wars;
And therefore, brother, banish him forever.
Art thou an enemy to my Gaveston?
Ay, and it grieves me that I favored him.
Traitor, be gone! whine thou with Mortimer.
So will I, rather than with Gaveston.
Out of my sight, and trouble me no more!
No marvel though thou scorn thy noble peers,
When I thy brother am rejected thus. 
Away! poor Gaveston, thou hast no friend but me,
Do what they can, we'll live in Tynemouth here;
And, so I walk with him about the walls,
What care I though the Earls begirt us round?
Here comes she that's cause of all these jars.
My lord, 'tis thought the Earls are up in arms.
Ay, and 'tis likewise thought you favor 'em.
Thus do you still suspect me without cause.
Sweet uncle, speak more kindly to the queen.
My lord, dissemble with her; speak her fair.
Your pardon is quickly got of Isabel.
The younger Mortimer is grown so brave,
That to my face he threatens civil wars.
Why do you not commit him to the tower?
I dare not, for the people love him well.
Why, then, we'll have him privily made away.
Would Lancaster and he had both caroused
A bowl of poison to each other's health!
But let them go, and tell me what are these.
Two of my father's servants whilst he lived:
May't please your grace to entertain them now.
Tell me, where wast thou born? What is thine arms?
I fetch from Oxford, not from Heraldry.
The fitter art thou, Baldock, for my turn.
Wait on me, and I'll see thou shalt not want.
His name is Spencer; he is well allied.
For my sake let him wait upon your grace;
Scarce shall you find a man of more desert.
Then, Spencer, wait upon me. For his sake
I'll grace thee with a higher style ere long.
No greater titles happen unto me
Than to be favored of your majesty!
Cousin, this day shall be your marriage feast;
And, Gaveston, think that I love thee well,
To wed thee to our niece, the only heir
Unto the Earl of Gloucester late deceased.
I know, my lord, many will stomach me;
But I respect neither their love nor hate.
The headstrong Barons shall not limit me;
He that I list to favor shall be great.
Come, let's away; and, when the marriage ends,
Have at the rebels and their 'complices!
My lords, of love to this our native land,
I come to join with you, and leave the king;
And in your quarrel, and the realm's behoof,
Will be the first that shall adventure life.
I fear me, you are sent of policy,
To undermine us with a show of love.
He is your brother; therefore have we cause
To cast the worst, and doubt of your revolt.
Mine honor shall be hostage of my truth:
If that will not suffice, farewell, my lords.
Stay, Edmund: never was Plantagenet
False of his word; and therefore trust we thee.
But what's the reason you should leave him now?
I have informed the Earl of Lancaster.
And it sufficeth. Now, my lords, know this,
That Gaveston is secretly arrived,
And here in Tynemouth frolics with the king.
Let us with these our followers scale the walls,
And suddenly surprise them unawares.
I'll give the onset. And I'll follow thee.
This tottered ensign of my ancestors,
Which swept the desert shore of that dead sea
Whereof we got the name of Mortimer,
Will I advance upon these castle walls,
Drums, strike alarum, raise them from their sport,
And ring aloud the knell of Gaveston!
None be so hardy as to touch the King;
But neither spare you Gaveston nor his friends.
O, tell me, Spencer, where is Gaveston?
I fear me he is slain, my gracious lord.
No, here he comes; now let them spoil and kill.
Fly, fly, my lords; the earls have got the hold;
Take shipping, and away to Scarborough.
Spencer and I will post away by land.
O stay, my lord, they will not injure you.
I will not trust them, Gaveston, away!
Farewell, my Lord.  Lady, farewell.
Farewell, sweet uncle, till we meet again.
Farewell, sweet Gaveston; and farewell, Niece.
No farewell to poor Isabel thy Queen?
Yes, yes, for Mortimer your lover's sake.
Heavens can witness, I love none but you.
From my embracements thus he breaks away.
O, that mine arms could close this Isle about,
That I might pull him to me where I would,
Or that these tears, that drizzle from mine eyes,
Had power to mollify his stony heart,
That, when I had him, we might never part!
I wonder how he scaped.  Who's this? the Queen?
Ay, Mortimer, the miserable Queen,
Whose pining heart her inward sighs have blasted,
And body with continual mourning wasted.
These hands are tired with haling of my lord
From Gaveston, from wicked Gaveston;
And all in vain; for when I speak him fair,
He turns away, and smiles upon his minion.
Cease to lament, and tell us where's the king?
What would you with the king? is't him you seek?
No, madam, but that cursed Gaveston.
Far be it from the thought of Lancaster
To offer violence to his sovereign!
We would but rid the realm of Gaveston.
Tell us where he remains, and he shall die.
He's gone by water unto Scarborough;
Pursue him quickly, and he cannot 'scape:
The king hath left him, and his train is small.
Forslow no time, sweet Lancaster; let's march.
How comes it that the king and he is parted?
That this your army, going several ways,
Might be of lesser force, and with the power
That he intendeth presently to raise,
Be easily suppressed; and therefore be gone!
Here in the river rides a Flemish hoy;
Let's all aboard, and follow him amain.
The wind that bears him hence will fill our sails;
Come, come, aboard! 'tis but an hour's sailing.
Madam, stay you within this castle here.
No Mortimer; I'll to my lord the king.
Nay, rather sail with us to Scarborough.
You know the king is so suspicious
As, if he hear I have but talked with you,
Mine honor will be called in question;
And therefore, gentle Mortimer, be gone.
Madam, I cannot stay to answer you;
But think of Mortimer as he deserves.
So well hast thou deserved, sweet Mortimer,
As Isabel could live with thee forever.
In vain I look for love at Edward's hand,
Whose eyes are fixed on none but Gaveston;
Yet once more I'll importune him with prayers.
If he be strange, and not regard my words,
My son and I will over into France,
And to the king my brother there complain
How Gaveston hath robbed me of his love;
But yet, I hope, my sorrows will have end,
And Gaveston this blessed day be slain. 
Yet, lusty lords, I have escaped your hands,
Your threats, your 'larms, and your hot pursuits;
And, though divorced from king Edward's eyes,
Yet liveth Pierce of Gaveston unsurprised,
Breathing in hope (malgrado all your beards,
That muster rebels thus against your king)
To see his royal sovereign once again.
Upon him, soldiers, take away his weapons!
Thou proud disturber of thy country's peace,
Corrupter of thy king, cause of these broils,
Base flatterer, yield, and, were it not for shame,
Shame and dishonor to a soldier's name,
Upon my weapon's point here shouldst thou fall,
And welter in thy gore. Monster of men,
That, like the Greekish strumpet, trained to arms
And bloody wars so many valiant knights,
Look for no other fortune, wretch, than death!
King Edward is not here to buckler thee.
Lancaster, why talk'st thou to the slave?
Go, soldiers, take him hence; for, by my sword,
His head shall off. Gaveston, short warning
Shall serve thy turn: it is our country's cause
That here severely we will execute
Upon thy person. Hang him at a bough.
My Lord.  Soldiers, have him away.
But, for thou wert the favorite of a King,
Thou shalt have so much honor at our hands.
I thank you all, my lords: then I perceive
That heading is one, and hanging is the other,
My lords, king Edward greets you all by me.
His majesty, hearing that you had taken Gaveston,
Entreateth you by me, yet but he may
See him before he dies, for why, he says,
And sends you word, he knows that die he shall;
And, if you gratify his grace so far,
He will be mindful of the courtesy.
How now! Renowned Edward, how thy name
Revives poor Gaveston!  No, it needeth not.
Arundel, we will gratify the king
In other matters; he must pardon us in this.
Soldiers, away with him! Why, my lord of Warwick,
Will not these delays beget my hopes?
I know it, lords, it is this life you aim at,
Yet grant king Edward this.  Shalt thou appoint
What we shall grant? soldiers, away with him!
We'll send his head by thee; let him bestow
His tears on that, for that is all he gets
Of Gaveston, or else his senseless trunk.
Not so, my lord, lest he bestow more cost
In burying him than he hath ever earned.
My lords, it is his majesty's request,
And in the honor of a king he swears,
He will but talk with him, and send him back.
When, can you tell? Arundel, no; we wot,
He that the care of realm remits,
And drives his nobles to these exigents
For Gaveston, will, if he seize him once,
Violate any promise to possess him.
Then, if you will not trust his grace in keep,
My lords, I will be pledge for his return.
It is honorable in thee to offer this;
But, for we know thou art a noble gentleman,
We will not wrong thee so,
To make away a true man for a thief.
How mean'st thou, Mortimer? that is overbase.
Away, base groom, robber of king's renown!
Question with thy companions and mates.
My lord Mortimer, and you, my lords, each one,
To gratify the king's request therein,
Touching the sending of this Gaveston,
Because his majesty so earnestly
Desires to see the man before his death,
I will upon mine honor undertake
To carry him, and bring him back again;
Provided this, that you, my lord of Arundel,
Will join with me.  Pembroke, what wilt thou do?
Cause yet more bloodshed? is it not enough
That we have taken him, but must we now
Leave him on " had I wist," and let him go?
 My lords, I will not overwoo your honors,
But, if you dare trust Pembroke with the prisoner,
Upon mine oath, I will return him back.
My lord of Lancaster, what say you in this?
Why, I say, let him go on Pembroke's word.
Nay, do your pleasures: I know how 'twill prove.
Then give him me. Sweet sovereign, yet I come
To see thee ere I die! Yet not perhaps,
If Warwick's wit and policy prevail.
My lord of Pembroke, we deliver him you:
Return him on our honor, sound, away! 
My house is not far hence, out of the way
A little, but our men shall go along.
We that have pretty wenches to our wives,
Sir, must not come so near and balk their lips.
'Tis very kindly spoke, my lord of Pembroke;
Your honor hath an adamant of power
To draw a prince. So, my lord. Come hither, James.
I do commit this Gaveston to thee;
Be thou this night his keeper; in the morning
We will discharge thee of thy charge. Be gone.
Unhappy Gaveston, whither goest thou now?
O treacherous Warwick, thus to wrong thy friend!
I see it is your life these arms pursue.
Weaponless must I fall, and die in bands?
O, must this day be period of my life,
Center of all my bliss! and ye be men,
Speed to the king. My lord of Pembroke's men,
Strive you no longer. I will have that Gaveston.
Your lordship doth dishonor to yourself,
And wrong our lord, your honorable friend.
No, James, it is my country's cause I follow.
Go, take the villain: soldiers, come away;
We'll make quick work. Commend me to your master,
My friend, and tell him that I watched it well.
Come, let thy shadow parley with king Edward.
Treacherous earl, shall I not see the king?
The king of heaven perhaps, no other king.
Come, fellows, it booted not for us to strive;
We will in haste go certify our Lord. 
I long to hear an answer from the Barons
Touching my friend, my dearest Gaveston.
Ah, Spencer, not the riches of my realm
Can ransom him, ah, he is marked to die.
I know the malice of the younger Mortimer.
Warwick I know is rough, and Lancaster
Inexorable, and I shall never see
My lovely Pierce, my Gaveston again.
The Barons overbear me with their pride.
Were I king Edward, England's sovereign,
Son to the lovely Eleanor of Spain,
Great Edward Longshanks' issue, would I bear
These braves, this rage, and suffer uncontrolled
These Barons thus to beard me in my land,
In mine own realm? my lord, pardon my speech.
Did you retain your father's magnanimity,
Did you regard the honor of your name,
You would not suffer thus your majesty
Be counterbuffed of your nobility.
Strike off their heads, and let them preach on poles.
No doubt, such lessons they will teach the rest,
As by their preachments they will profit much
And learn obedience to their lawful king.
Yea, gentle Spencer, we have been too mild,
Too kind to them; but now have drawn our sword,
And, if they send me not my Gaveston,
We'll steel it on their crest and poll their tops.
This haught resolve becomes your majesty,
Not to be tied to their affection,
As though your highness were a schoolboy still,
And must be awed and governed like a child.
Long live my sovereign, the noble Edward,
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars!
Welcome, old man: com'st thou in Edward's aid?
Then tell thy prince of whence and what thou art.
Lo, with a band of bowmen and of pikes,
Brown bills and targeteers, 400 strong,
Sworn to defend king Edward's royal right,
I come in person to your majesty,
Spencer, the father of Hugh Spencer there,
Bound to you highness everlastingly
For favors done, in him, unto us all.
Thy father, Spencer? True, and it like your grace,
That pours, in lieu of all your goodness shown,
His life, my lord, before your princely feet.
Welcome ten thousand times, old man, again!
Spencer, this love, this kindness to thy King,
Argues thy noble mind and disposition.
Spencer, I here create thee earl of Wiltshire,
And daily will enrich thee with our favor,
That as the sunshine, shall reflect o'er thee.
Besides, the more to manifest our love,
Because we hear Lord Bruce doth sell his land
And that the Mortimers are in hand withal,
Thou shalt have crowns of us t' outbid the Barons;
And, Spencer, spare them not, but lay it on.
Soldiers, a largess, and thrice welcome all!
My lord, here comes the Queen. Madam, what news?
News of dishonor, lord, and discontent.
Our friend Levune, faithful and full of trust,
Informeth us, by letters and by words
That lord Valois our brother, king of France,
Because your highness hath been slack in homage,
Hath seized Normandy into his hands.
These be the letters, this the messenger.
Welcome, Levune. tush, Sib, if this be all,
Valois and I will soon be friends again.
But to my Gaveston: shall I never see,
Never behold thee now? Madam, in this matter
We will employ you and your little son:
You shall go parley with the king of France.
Boy, see you bear you bravely to the king,
And do your message with a majesty.
 Commit not to my youth things of more weight
Than fits a prince so young as I to bear;
And fear not, lord and father, heaven's great beams
On Atlas' shoulder shall not lie more safe
Than shall your charge committed to my trust.
 Ah, boy, this towardness makes thy mother fear
Thou are not marked to many days on earth!
 Madam, we will that you with speed be shipped,
And this our son; Levune shall follow you
With all the haste we can dispatch him hence.
Choose of our lords to bear you company,
And go in peace; leave us in wars at home.
 Unnatural wars, where subjects brave their king:
God end them once! my lord, I take my leave
To make my preparation for France.
What, lord Arundel, dost thou come alone?
Yea, my good lord, for Gaveston is dead.
Ah, traitors. Have they put my friend to death?
Tell me, Arundel, died he ere thou cam'st,
Or didst thou see my friend to take his death?
Neither, my lord; for, as he was surprised,
Begirt with weapons and with enemies round,
I did your highness' message to them all,
Demanding him of them, entreating rather,
And said, upon the honor of my name,
That I would undertake to carry him
Unto your highness, and to bring him back.
And tell me, would the rebels deny me that?
Proud recreants!   Yea, Spencer, traitors all!
I found them at the first inexorable.
The earl of Warwick would not bide the hearing,
Mortimer hardly; Pembroke and Lancaster
Spake least. And when they flatly had denied,
Refusing to receive me pledge for him,
The earl of Pembroke mildly thus bespake:
"My lords, because our sovereign sends for him
And promiseth he shall be safe returned,
I will this undertake, to have him hence
And see him redelivered to your hands."
Well, and how fortunes it that he came not?
Some treason or some villainy was cause.
The earl of Warwick seized him on his way;
For being delivered unto Pembroke's men,
Their lord rode home thinking his prisoner safe;
But ere he came, Warwick in ambush lay,
And bare him to his death, and in a trench
Strake off his head, and marched unto the camp.
A bloody part, flatly against law of arms.
O shall I speak, or shall I sigh and die!
My lord, refer your vengeance to the sword
Upon these Barons; hearten up your men;
Let them not unrevenged murder your friends.
Advance your standard, Edward, in the field,
And march to fire them from their starting holes.
By earth, the common mother of us all,
By heaven, and all the moving orbs thereof,
By this right hand, and by my father's sword,
And all the honors 'longing to my crown,
I will have heads and lives for him as many
As I have manors, castles, towns, and towers!
Treacherous Warwick! traitorous Mortimer!
If I be England's king, in lakes of gore
Your headless trunks, your bodies will I trail,
That you may drink your fill, and quaff in blood,
And stain my royal standard with the same,
That so my bloody colors may suggest
Remembrance of revenge immortally
On your accursed traitorous progeny,
You villains that have slain my Gaveston!
And in this place of honor and of trust,
Spencer, sweet Spencer, I adopt thee here;
And merely of our love we do create thee
Earl of Gloucester and lord Chamberlain,
Despite of times, despite of enemies.
My lord, here's a messenger from the Barons
Desires access unto your majesty.
Long live king Edward, England's lawful lord!
So wish not they, I wis, that sent thee hither.
Thou com'st from Mortimer and his 'complices;
A ranker rout of rebels never was.
The Barons up in arms by me salute
Your highness with long life and happiness,
And bid me say, as plainer to your grace,
That if without effusion of blood
You will this grief have ease and remedy,
That from your princely person you remove
This Spencer, as a putrifying branch
That deads the royal vine, whose golden leaves
Empale your princely head, your diadem
Whose brightness such pernicious upstarts dim,
Say they, and lovingly advise your grace
To cherish virtue and nobility,
And have old servitors in high esteem,
And shake off smooth dissembling flatterers.
This granted, they, their honors, and their lives,
Are to your highness vowed and consecrate.
Ah, traitors, will they still display their pride?
Away! tarry no answer, but be gone!
Rebels, will they appoint their sovereign
His sports, his pleasures, and his company?
Yet, ere thou go, see how I do divorce
Spencer from me.  now get thee to thy lords,
And tell them I will come to chastise them
For murdering Gaveston. Hie thee, get thee gone!
Edward with fire and sword follows at thy heels.
My lord, perceive you how these rebels swell?
Soldiers, good hearts, defend your sovereign's right,
For now, even now, we march to make them stoop.
Why do we sound retreat? upon them, lords!
This day I shall pour vengeance with my sword
On those proud rebels that are up in arms,
And do confront and countermand their king.
I doubt it not, my lord; right will prevail.
'tis not amiss, my liege, for either part
To breathe a while. Our men, with sweat and dust
All choked well near, begin to faint for heat;
And this retire refresheth horse and man.
Till he pay dearly for their company.
And shall, or Warwick's sword shall smite in vain.
What, rebels, do you shrink and sound retreat?
No, Edward, no; thy flatterers faint and fly.
Thou'd best betimes forsake them and their trains,
For they'll betray thee, traitors as they are.
Traitor on thy face, rebellious Lancaster!
Away, base upstart! brav'st thou nobles thus?
A noble attempt and honorable deed,
Is it not, trow ye, to assemble aid
And levy arms against your lawful king?
For which, ere long, their heads shall satisfy
T'appease the wrath of their offended king.
Then, Edward, thou wilt fight it to the last
And rather bathe thy sword in subjects' blood
Than banish that pernicious company.
Ay, traitors all, rather than thus be braved,
Make England's civil towns huge heaps of stones
And plows to go about our palace gates.
A desperate and unnatural resolution.
Saint George for England, and the barons' right!
Saint George for England, and king Edward's right!
Now, lusty lords, now not by chance of war,
But justice of the quarrel and the cause,
Vailed is your pride. Methinks you hang the heads,
But we'll advance them, traitors. Now 'tis time
To be avenged on you for all your braves,
And for the murder of my dearest friend,
To whom right well you knew our soul was knit,
Good Pierce of Gaveston, my sweet favorite.
Ah, rebels, recreants, you made him away!
Brother, in regard of thee and of thy land,
Did they remove that flatterer from thy throne.
So, sir, you have spoke. Away, avoid our presence!
Accursed wretches, was't in regard of us,
When he had sent our messenger to request
He might be spared to come to speak with us,
And Pembroke undertook for his return,
That thou, proud Warwick, watched the prisoner,
Poor Pierce, and headed him against law of arms?
For which thy head shall overlook the rest
As much as thou in rage outwent'st the rest.
Tyrant, I scorn thy threats and menaces;
'Tis but temporal that thou canst inflict.
The worst is death; and better die to live
Than live in infamy under such a king.
Away with them, my lord of Winchester!
These lusty leaders, Warwick and Lancaster,
I charge you roundly, off with both their heads!
Farewell, vain world!   Sweet Mortimer, farewell!
England, unkind to thy nobility,
Groan for this grief, behold how thou art maimed!
Go, take that haughty Mortimer to the tower;
There see him safe bestowed; and for the rest,
Do speedy execution on them all.
What, Mortimer? can ragged stony walls
Immure thy virtue that aspires to heaven?
No, Edward, England's scourge, it may not be;
Mortimer's hope surmounts his fortune far.
Sound drums and trumpets, march with me, my friends.
Edward this day hath crowned him king anew. 
Levune, the trust that we repose in thee
Begets the quiet of king Edward's land.
Therefore be gone in haste, and with advice
Bestow that treasure on the lords of France,
That, therewith all enchanted, like the guard
That suffered Jove to pass in showers of gold
To Danae, all aid may be denied
To Isabel the Queen, that now in France
Makes friends, to cross the seas with her young son,
And step into his father's regiment.
That's it these Barons and the subtle Queen
Long leveled at.  Yea, but, Levune, thou seest
These barons lay their heads on blocks together;
What they intend, the hangman frustrates clean.
Have you no doubts, my lords, I'll clap so close
Among the lords of France with England's gold,
That Isabel shall make her plaints in vain,
And France shall be obdurate with her tears.
Then make for France amain; Levune, away!
Proclaim king Edward's wars and victories.
Fair blows the wind for France: blow, gentle gale,
Till Edmund be arrived for England's good,
Nature, yield to my country's cause in this!
A brother, no, a butcher of thy friends,
Proud Edward, dost thou banish me thy presence?
But I'll to France, and cheer the wronged Queen,
And certify what Edward's looseness is.
Unnatural king, to slaughter noblemen
And cherish flatterers. Mortimer, I stay
Stand gracious gloomy night to his device.
Holla, who walketh there? is't you my lord?
But hath thy potion wrought so happily?
It hath, my lord. The warders all asleep,
I thank them, gave me leave to pass in peace.
But hath your grace got shipping unto France?
Ah, boy, our friends do fail us all in France.
The lords are cruel, and the king unkind.
What shall we do? Madam, return to England
And please my father well; and then a Fig
For all my uncle's friendship here in France.
I warrant you, I'll win his highness quickly;
'A loves me better than a thousand Spencers.
Ah, boy, thou art deceived, at least in this,
To think that we can yet be tuned together.
No, no, we jar too far. Unkind Valois,
Unhappy Isabel, when France rejects,
Whither, O, whither dost thou bend thy steps?
Madam, what cheer? Ah, good sir John of Hainault,
Never so cheerless nor so far distressed!
I hear, sweet lady, of the king's unkindness;
But droop not, madam; noble minds contemn
Despair. Will your grace with me to Hainault,
And there stay time's advantage with your son?
How say you, my Lord, will you go with your friends,
And share of all our fortunes equally?
So pleaseth the Queen my mother, me it likes.
The king of England, nor the court of France,
Shall have me from my gracious mother's side,
Till I be strong enough to break a staff;
And then have at the proudest Spencer's head.
O, my sweet heart, how do I moan thy wrongs,
Yet triumph in the hope of thee, my joy.
Ah, sweet sir John, even to the utmost verge
Of Europe, on the shore of Tanais,
Will we with thee to Hainault, so we will.
The Marquis is a noble Gentleman;
His grace, I dare presume, will welcome me.
But who are these? Madam, long may you live,
Much happier than your friends in England do.
Lord Edmund and lord Mortimer alive?
Welcome to France. The news was here, my lord,
That you were dead, or very near your death.
Lady, the last was truest of the twain,
But Mortimer, reserved for better hap,
Hath shaken off the thralldom of the tower
And lives t' advance your standard, good my lord.
How mean you, and the king my father lives?
No, my lord Mortimer, not I, I trow.
Not, son! why not? I would it were no worse,
But, gentle lords, friendless we are in France.
Monsieur le Grand, a noble friend of yours,
Told us, at our arrival, all the news,
How hard the nobles, how unkind the king
Hath showed himself: but madam, right makes room
Where weapons want; and, though a many friends
Are made away, as Warwick, Lancaster,
And others of our part and faction,
Yet have we friends, assure your grace, in England
Would cast up caps and clap their hands for joy,
To see us there appointed for our foes.
Would all were well, and Edward well reclaimed,
For England's honor, peace and quietness.
But by the sword, my lord, it must be deserved;
The king will ne'er forsake his flatterers.
My lords of England, sith the ungentle king
Of France refuseth to give aid of arms
To this distressed Queen, his sister, here,
Go you with her to Hainault. Doubt ye not
We will find comfort, money, men, and friends
Ere long, to bid the English king a base.
How say, young Prince, what think you of the match?
I think king Edward will outrun us all.
Nay, son, not so; and you must not discourage
Your friends that are so forward in your aid.
Sir John of Hainault, pardon us, I pray:
These comforts that you give our woeful queen
Bind us in kindness all at your command.
Yea, gentle brother: and the God of heaven
Prosper your happy motion, good sir John.
This noble gentleman, forward in arms,
Was born, I see, to be our anchor hold.
Sir John of Hainault, be it thy renown,
That England's Queen and nobles in distress
Have been by thee restored and comforted.
Madam, along; and you, my lords, with me,
That England's peers may Hainault's welcome see.
Thus, after many threats of wrathful war,
Triumpheth England's Edward with his friends,
And triumph Edward with his friends uncontrolled.
My lord of Gloucester, do you hear the news?
Why, man, they say there is great execution
Done through the realm. My lord of Arundel,
You have the note, have you not?
From the lieutenant of the tower, my lord.
I pray, let us see it, what have we there?
Read it, Spencer. (Spencer reads their names.
Why, so: they barked apace a month ago;
Now, on my life, they'll neither bark nor bite.
Now, sirs, the news from France. Gloucester, I trow,
The lords of France love England's gold so well
As Isabel gets no aid from thence.
What now remains? have you proclaimed, my lord,
Reward for them can bring in Mortimer?
My lord, we have; and, if he be in England,
'A will be had ere long, I doubt it not.
If, dost thou say? Spencer, as true as death,
He is in England's ground; our port masters
Are not so careless of their king's command.
How now! what news with thee? from whence come these?
Letters, my lord, and tidings forth of France;
To you, my lord of Gloucester, from Levune.
Ah, villains, hath that Mortimer escaped?
With him is Edmund gone associate?
And will sir John of Hainault lead the round?
Welcome, a God's name, Madam, and your son,
England shall welcome you and all your rout.
Gallop apace, bright Phoebus, through the sky,
And, dusky night, in rusty iron car,
Between you both shorten the time, I pray,
That I may see that most desired day
When we may meet these traitors in the field.
Ah, nothing grieves me but my little boy
Is thus misled to countenance their ills.
Come, friends, to Bristol, there to make us strong;
And, winds, as equal be to bring them in,
As you injurious were to bear them forth.
Now, lords, our loving friends and countrymen,
Welcome to England all, with prosperous winds.
Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left,
To cope with friends at home; a heavy case
When force to force is knit, and sword and glaive
In civil broils make kin and countrymen
Slaughter themselves in others, and their sides
With their own weapons gored! but what's the help?
Misgoverned kings are cause of all this wrack;
And, Edward, thou art one among them all
Whose looseness hath betrayed thy land to spoil
And made the channels overflow with blood.
Of thine own people patron shouldst thou be,
But thou...  Nay, madam, if you be a warrior,
You must not grow so passionate in speeches.
Lords, sith that we are, by sufferance of heaven,
Arrived and armed in this prince's right,
Here for our country's cause swear we to him
All homage, fealty, and forwardness;
And for the open wrongs and injuries
Edward hath done to us, his Queen, and land,
We come in arms to wreck it with the sword,
That England's queen in peace may repossess
Her dignities and honors; and withal
We may remove these flatterers from the king
That havoc England's wealth and treasury.
Sound trumpets, my lord, and forward let us march.
Edward will think we come to flatter him.
I would he never had been flattered more.
Fly, fly, my Lord, the Queen is overstrong;
Her friends do multiply, and yours do fail.
Shape we our course to Ireland, there to breathe.
What, was I born to fly and run away,
And leave the Mortimers conquerors behind?
Give me my horse, and let's r'enforce our troops,
And in this bed of honors die with fame.
O no, my lord, this princely resolution
Fits not the time; away, we are pursued.
This way he fled, but I am come too late.
Edward, alas, my heart relents for thee.
Proud traitor, Mortimer, why dost thou chase
Thy lawful king, thy sovereign, with thy sword?
Vild wretch, and why hast thou, of all unkind,
Borne arms against thy brother and thy king?
Rain showers of vengeance on my cursed head
Thou God, to whom in justice it belongs
To punish this unnatural revolt.
Edward, this Mortimer aims at thy life.
O, fly him, then! but, Edmund, calm this rage;
Dissemble, or thou diest; for Mortimer
And Isabel do kiss while they conspire;
And yet she bears a face of love forsooth.
Fie on that love that hatcheth death and hate.
Edmund, away! Bristol to Longshanks' blood
Is false; be not found single for suspect.
Proud Mortimer pries near into thy walks.
Successful battles gives the God of kings
To them that fight in right and fear his wrath.
Since then successfully we have prevailed,
Thanks be heaven's great architect, and you.
Ere farther we proceed, my noble lords,
We here create our well-beloved son,
Of love and care unto his royal person,
Lord warden of the realm, and sith the fates
Have made his father so unfortunate,
Deal you, my lords, in this, my loving lords,
As to your wisdoms fittest seems in all.
Madam, without offense if I may ask
How will you deal with Edward in his fall?
Tell me, good uncle, what Edward do you mean?
Nephew, your father; I dare not call him king.
My lord of Kent, what needs these questions?
'Tis not in her controlment nor in ours,
But as the realm and parliament shall please,
So shall your brother be disposed of.
I like not this relenting mood in Edmund.
Madam, 'tis good to look to him betimes.
My lord, the Mayor of Bristol knows our mind.
Yea, madam; and they scape not easily
That fled the field. Baldock is with the king.
A goodly chancellor, is he not, my lord?
So are the Spencers, the father and the son.
This Edward is the ruin of the realm.
God save Queen Isabel and her princely son!
Madam, the Mayor and Citizens of Bristol,
In sign of love and duty to this presence,
Present by me this traitor to the state,
Spencer, the father to that wanton Spencer,
That, like the lawless Catiline of Rome,
Reveled in England's wealth and treasury.
We thank you all. Your loving care in this
Deserveth princely favors and rewards.
But where's the king and the other Spencer fled?
Spencer the son, created earl of Gloucester,
Is with that smooth tongued scholar Baldock gone
And shipped but late for Ireland with the king.
Some whirlwind fetch them back, or sink them all.
They shall be started thence, I doubt it not.
Shall I not see the king my father yet?
Unhappy's Edward, chased from England's bounds.
Madam, what resteth? why stand ye in a muse?
I rue my lord's ill fortune; but, alas,
Care of my country called me to this war!
Madam, have done with care and sad complaint.
Your king hath wronged your country and himself,
And we must seek to right it as we may.
Meanwhile, have hence this rebel to the block.
Your lordship cannot privilege your head.
Rebel is he that fights against his prince:
So fought not they that fought in Edward's right.
Take him away; he prates. You, Rice ap Howell,
Shall do good service to her Majesty,
Being of countenance in your country here,
To follow these rebellious runagates.
We in meanwhile, madam, must take advice,
How Baldock, Spencer, and their 'complices,
May in their fall be followed to their end.
Have you no doubt, my Lord; have you no fear.
As silent and as careful will we be
To keep your royal person safe with us,
Free from suspect, and fell invasion
Of such as have your majesty in chase,
Yourself, and those your chosen company,
As danger of this stormy time requires.
Father, thy face should harbor no deceit.
O, hadst thou ever been a king, thy heart,
Pierced deeply with sense of my distress,
Could not but take compassion of my state.
Stately and proud in riches and in train,
Whilom I was powerful and full of pomp.
But what is he whom rule and empery
Have not in life or death made miserable?
Come, Spencer, come, Baldock, come, sit down by me;
Make trial now of that philosophy
That in our famous nurseries of arts
Thou sucked'st from Plato and from Aristotle.
Father, this life contemplative is heaven.
O that I might this life in quiet lead,
But we, alas, are chased, and you, my friends,
Your lives and my dishonor they pursue.
Yet, gentle monks, for treasure, gold, nor fee,
Do you betray us and our company.
Your grace may sit secure, if none but we
Not one alive: but shrewdly I suspect
A gloomy fellow in a mead below.
'A gave a long look after us, my lord;
And all the land, I know, is up in arms,
Arms that pursue our lives with deadly hate.
We were embarked for Ireland; wretched we,
With awkward winds and sore tempests driven
To fall on shore, and here to pine in fear
Of Mortimer and his confederates.
Mortimer! who talks of Mortimer?
Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer,
That bloody man? good father, on thy lap
Lay I this head, laden with mickle care.
O might I never open these eyes again,
Never again lift up this drooping head,
O, nevermore lift up this dying heart!
Look up, my lord. Baldock, this drowsiness
Betides no good; here even we are betrayed.
Upon my life, those be the men ye seek.
Fellow, enough. My lord, I pray, be short;
A fair commission warrants what we do.
The Queen's commission, urged by Mortimer:
What cannot gallant Mortimer with the Queen?
Alas, see where he sits, and hopes unseen
T'escape their hands that seek to reave his life.
Too true it is, quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.
But, Leicester, leave to grow so passionate.
Spencer and Baldock, by no other names,
I arrest you of high treason here.
Stand not on titles, but obey th' arrest:
'Tis in the name of Isabel the Queen.
My lord, why droop you thus?
 O day, the last of all my bliss on earth,
Center of all misfortune! O my stars,
Why do you lower unkindly on a king?
Comes Leicester, then, in Isabella's name
To take my life, my company from me?
Here, man, rip up this panting breast of mine,
And take my heart in rescue of my friends.
Away with them! It may become thee yet
To let us take our farewell of his grace.
My heart with pity earns to see this sight,
A king to bear these words and proud commands.
Spencer, ah, sweet Spencer, thus, then must we part.
We must, my lord; so will the angry heavens.
Nay, so will hell and cruel Mortimer;
The gentle heavens have not to do in this.
My lord, it is in vain to grieve or storm.
Here humbly of your grace we take our leaves.
Our lots are cast; I fear me, so is thine.
In heaven we may, in earth never shall we meet.
And, Leicester, say, what shall become of us?
Your majesty must go to Killingworth.
Must! 'tis somewhat hard when kings must go.
Here is a Litter ready for your grace,
That waits your pleasure, and the day grows old.
As good be gone, as stay and be benighted.
A litter hast thou? lay me in a hearse,
And to the gates of hell convey me hence.
Let Pluto's bells ring out my fatal knell,
And hags howl for my death at Charon's shore;
For friends hath Edward none but these, and these,
And these must die under a tyrant's sword.
My lord, be going: care not for these;
For we shall see them shorter by the heads.
Well, that shall be, shall be. Part we must.
Sweet Spencer, gentle Baldock, part we must.
Hence, feigned weeds! unfeigned are my woes.
Father, farewell. Leicester, thou stay'st for me,
And go I must. Life, farewell, with my friends.
O, is he gone? is noble Edward gone,
Parted from hence, never to see us more?
Rent, sphere of heaven, and, fire, forsake thy orb!
Earth, melt to air! gone is my sovereign,
Gone, gone, alas, never to make return.
Spencer, I see our souls are fleeted hence;
We are deprived the sunshine of our life.
Make for a new life, man; throw up thy eyes
And heart and hand to heaven's immortal throne;
Pay nature's debt with cheerful countenance,
Reduce we all our lessons unto this,
To die, sweet Spencer, therefore live we all;
Spencer, all live to die, and rise to fall.
Be patient, good my lord, cease to lament.
Imagine Killingworth castle were your court,
And that you lay for pleasure here a space,
Not of compulsion or necessity.
Leicester, if gentle words might comfort me,
Thy speeches long ago had eased my sorrows,
For kind and loving hast thou always been.
The griefs of private men are soon allayed;
But not of kings. the forest Deer, being struck,
Runs to an herb that closeth up the wounds;
But when the imperial Lion's flesh is gored,
He rends and tears it with his wrathful paw,
Highly scorning that the lowly earth
Should drink his blood, mounts into the air.
And so it fares with me, whose dauntless mind
The ambitious Mortimer would seek to curb,
And that unnatural Queen, false Isabel,
That thus hath pent and mewed me in a prison;
For such outrageous passions cloy my soul,
As with the wings of rancor and disdain
Full often am I soaring up to heaven,
To plain me to the gods against them both.
But when I call to mind I am a king,
Methinks I should revenge me of my wrongs,
That Mortimer and Isabel have done.
But what are kings, when regiment is gone,
But perfect shadows in a sunshine day?
My nobles rule; I bear the name of king;
I wear the crown; but am controlled by them,
By Mortimer, and my unconstant Queen,
Who spots my nuptial bed with infamy;
Whilst I am lodged within this cave of care,
Where sorrow at my elbow still attends,
To company my heart with sad laments,
That bleeds within me for this strange exchange.
But tell me, must I now resign my crown,
To make usurping Mortimer a king?
Your grace mistakes; it is for England's good,
And princely Edward's right, we crave the crown.
No, 'tis for Mortimer, not Edward's head;
For he's a lamb, encompassed by Wolves,
Which in a moment will abridge his life.
But, if proud Mortimer do wear this crown,
Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchless fire,
Or, like the snaky wreath of Tisiphon,
Engirt the temples of his hateful head;
So shall not England's Vine be perished,
But Edward's name survive, though Edward dies.
My lord, why waste you thus the time away?
They stay your answer; will you yield your crown?
Ah, Leicester, weigh how hardly I can brook
To lose my crown and kingdom without cause,
To give ambitious Mortimer my right,
That, like a mountain, overwhelms my bliss.
In which extreme my mind here murdered is.
But what the heavens appoint I must obey.
Here, take my crown; the life of Edward too:
Two kings in England cannot reign at once.
But stay a while. Let me be king till night,
That I may gaze upon this glittering crown;
So shall my eyes receive their last content,
My head, the latest honor due to it,
And jointly both yield up their wished right.
Continue ever, thou celestial sun;
Let never silent night possess this clime:
Stand still, you watches of the element;
All times and seasons, rest you at a stay,
That Edward may be still fair England's king.
But day's bright beams doth vanish fast away,
And needs I must resign my wished crown.
Inhuman creatures, nursed with Tiger's milk,
Why gape you for your sovereign's overthrow?
My diadem, I mean, and guiltless life.
See, monsters, see! I'll wear my crown again.
What, fear you not the fury of your king?
But, hapless Edward, thou art fondly led;
They pass not for thy frowns as late they did,
But seek to make a new elected king;
Which fills my mind with strange despairing thoughts,
Which thoughts are martyred with endless torments.
And in this torment comfort find I none,
But that I feel the crown upon my head;
And therefore let me wear it yet a while.
My Lord, the parliament must have present news,
And therefore say, will you resign or no?
I'll not resign, but, whilst I live...
Traitors, be gone, and join you with Mortimer.
Elect, conspire, install, do what you will;
Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries.
This answer we'll return; and so, farewell.
Call them again, my lord, and speak them fair,
For if they go, the prince shall lose his right.
Call thou them back; I have no power to speak.
My lord, the king is willing to resign.
O would I might, but heavens and earth conspire
To make me miserable. Here, receive my crown.
Receive it? no, these innocent hands of mine
Shall not be guilty of so foul a crime.
He of you all that most desires my blood
And will be called the murderer of a king,
Take it. What, are you moved? pity you me?
Then send for unrelenting Mortimer
And Isabel, whose eyes being turned to steel
Will sooner sparkle fire than shed a tear.
Yet stay; for rather than I will look on them,
Here, here! now, sweet God of heaven,
Make me despise this transitory pomp,
And sit for aye enthronized in heaven.
Come, death, and with thy fingers close my eyes,
Or if I live, let me forget myself.
Away, out of my sight! ah, pardon me;
Let not that Mortimer protect my son;
More safety is there in a Tiger's jaws
Than his embracements. Bear this to the queen,
Wet with my tears, and dried again with sighs.
If with the sight thereof she be not moved,
Return it back, and dip it in my blood.
Commend me to my son, and bid him rule
Better than I. Yet how have I transgressed,
Unless it be with too much clemency?
And thus, most humbly do we take our leave.
Farewell. I know the next news that they bring
Will be my death, and welcome shall it be.
To wretched men death is felicity.
Such news as I expect. Come, Berkeley, come
And tell thy message to my naked breast.
My lord, think not a thought so villainous
Can harbor in a man of noble birth.
To do your highness service and devoir
And save you from your foes, Berkeley would die.
My lord, the council of the Queen commands
And who must keep me now? must you, my lord?
Ay, my most gracious lord: so 'tis decreed.
By Mortimer, whose name is written here!
Well may I rent his name that rends my heart,
This poor revenge hath something eased my mind.
So may his limbs be torn as is this paper,
Hear me, immortal Jove, and grant it too!
Your grace must hence with me to Berkeley straight.
Whither you will: all places are alike,
And every earth is fit for burial.
Favor him, my lord, as much as lieth in you.
Even so betide my soul as I use him.
Mine enemy hath pitied my estate,
And that's the cause that I am now removed.
And thinks your grace that Berkeley will be cruel?
I know not, but of this am I assured,
That death ends all, and I can die but once.
Not yet, my lord; I'll bear you on your way.
Fair Isabel, now have we our desire;
The proud corrupters of the light-brained king
Have done their homage to the lofty gallows,
And he himself lies in captivity.
Be ruled by me, and we will rule the realm.
In any case take heed of childish fear,
For now we hold an old Wolf by the ears,
That, if he slip, will seize upon us both,
And gripe the sorer, being griped himself.
Think therefore, madam, that imports us much
To erect your son with all the speed we may,
And that I be protector over him;
For our behoof will bear the greater sway
Whenas a king's name shall be under writ.
Sweet Mortimer, the life of Isabel,
Be thou persuaded that I love thee well;
And therefore, so the prince my son be safe,
Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes,
Conclude against his father what thou wilt,
And I myself will willingly subscribe.
First would I hear news that he were deposed,
And then let me alone to handle him.
Letters! from whence? From Killingworth, my lord.
In health, madam, but full of pensiveness.
Alas, poor soul, would I could ease his grief!
Thanks, gentle Winchester. Sirrah, be gone.
The king hath willingly resigned his crown.
O, happy news! send for the prince my son.
Further, or ere this letter was sealed,
So that he now is gone from Killingworth;
And we have heard that Edmund laid a plot
To set his brother free; no more but so.
The lord of Berkeley is so pitiful
As Leicester that had charge of him before.
Then let some other be his guardian.
Let me alone; here is the privy seal.
Who's there? call hither Gurney and Matrevis.
To dash the heavy headed Edmund's drift,
Berkeley shall be discharged, the king removed,
And none but we shall know where he lieth.
But, Mortimer, as long as he survives,
What safety rests for us or for my son?
Speak, shall he presently be dispatched and die?
I would he were, so it were not by my means.
Enough! Matrevis, write a letter presently
Unto the lord of Berkeley from ourself
That he resign the king to thee and Gurney;
And when 'tis done, we will subscribe our name.
It shall be done, my lord. Gurney. My Lord.
As thou intendest to rise by Mortimer,
Who now makes Fortune's wheel turn as he please,
Seek all the means thou canst to make him droop,
And neither give him kind word nor good look.
And this above the rest: because we hear
That Edmund casts to work his liberty,
Remove him still from place to place by night,
Till at the last he come to Killingworth,
And then from thence to Berkeley back again.
And by the way, to make him fret the more,
Speak curs'dly to him; and in any case
Let no man comfort him. If he chance to weep,
But amplify his grief with bitter words.
Fear not, my Lord; we'll do as you command.
So, now away! post thitherwards amain.
Whither goes this letter? to my lord the king?
Commend me humbly to his Majesty,
And tell him that I labor all in vain
To ease his grief and work his liberty;
And bear him this as witness of my love.
Finely dissembled! do so still, sweet Queen.
Here comes the young prince with the Earl of Kent.
Some thing he whispers in his childish ears.
If he have such access unto the prince,
Our plots and stratagems will soon be dashed.
Use Edmund friendly as if all were well.
How fares my honorable lord of Kent?
In health, sweet Mortimer. How fares your grace?
Well, if my Lord your brother were enlarged.
I hear of late he hath deposed himself.
Sweet son, come hither; I must talk with thee.
Thou, being his uncle and the next of blood,
Do look to be protector over the prince?
Not I, my lord. Who should protect the son,
But she that gave him life? I mean the Queen.
Mother, persuade me not to wear the crown.
Let him be king; I am too young to reign.
But be content, seeing it is his highness' pleasure.
Let me but see him first, and then I will.
Brother, you know it is impossible.
I would those words proceeded from your heart!
Inconstant Edmund, dost thou favor him,
That wast a cause of his imprisonment?
The more cause have I now to make amends.
I tell thee, 'tis not meet that one so false
Should come about the person of a prince.
My lord, he hath betrayed the king his brother,
And therefore trust him not.
But he repents and sorrows for it now.
Come, son, and go with this gentle Lord and me.
With you I will, but not with Mortimer.
Why, youngling, 'sdain'st thou so of Mortimer?
Then I will carry thee by force away.
Help, uncle Kent; Mortimer will wrong me.
Brother Edmund, strive not; we are his friends.
Isabel is nearer than the earl of Kent.
Sister, Edward is my charge; redeem him.
Edward is my son, and I will keep him.
Mortimer shall know that he hath wronged me.
Hence will I haste to Killingworth castle
And rescue aged Edward from his foes,
To be revenged on Mortimer and thee.
My lord, be not pensive; we are your friends.
Men are ordained to live in misery.
Therefore, come; dalliance dangereth our lives.
Friends, whither must unhappy Edward go?
Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest?
Must I be vexed like the nightly bird
Whose sight is loathsome to all winged fowls?
When will the fury of his mind assuage?
When will his heart be satisfied with blood?
If mine will serve, unbowel straight this breast,
And give my heart to Isabel and him ...
It is the chiefest mark they level at.
Not so, my liege. The Queen hath given this charge
Your passions make your dolors to increase.
This usage makes my misery increase.
But can my air of life continue long
When all my senses are annoyed with stench?
Within a dungeon England's king is kept,
Where I am starved for want of sustenance.
My daily diet is heartbreaking sobs,
That almost rents the closet of my heart.
Thus lives old Edward not relieved by any,
And so must die, though pitied by many.
O, water, gentle friends, to cool my thirst
And clear my body from foul excrements!
Here's channel water, as our charge is given.
Sit down, for we'll be Barbers to your grace.
Traitors, away! what, will you murder me,
Or choke your sovereign with puddle water?
No, but wash your face, and shave away your beard,
Lest you be known, and so be rescued.
Why strive you thus? your labor is in vain.
The Wren may strive against the Lion's strength,
But all in vain: so vainly do I strive
To seek for mercy at a tyrant's hand.
Immortal powers, that know the painful cares
That wait upon my poor distressed soul,
O level all your looks upon these daring men
That wrong their liege and sovereign, England's king!
O Gaveston, it is for thee that I am wronged;
For me both thou and both the Spencers died,
And for your sakes a thousand wrongs I'll take.
The Spencers' ghosts, wherever they remain,
Wish well to mine; then tush, for them I'll die.
'Twixt theirs and yours shall be no enmity.
Come, come, away. Now put the torches out.
We'll enter in by darkness to Killingworth.
Guard the king sure: it is the earl of Kent.
O gentle brother, help to rescue me.
Keep them asunder; thrust in the king.
Soldiers, let me but talk to him one word.
Lay hands upon the earl for this assault.
Lay down your weapons, traitors; yield the king.
Edmund, yield thou thyself, or thou shalt die.
Base villains, wherefore do you gripe me thus?
Bind him, and so convey him to the court.
Where is the court but here? here is the king
And I will visit him. Why stay you me?
The court is where lord Mortimer remains.
Thither shall your honor go; and so, farewell.
O, miserable is that commonweal, where lords
Keep courts, and kings are locked in prison!
Wherefore stay we? on, sirs, to the court.
Ay, lead me whither you will, even to my death,
Seeing that my brother cannot be released.
The king must die, or Mortimer goes down;
The commons now begin to pity him.
Yet he that is the cause of Edward's death
Is sure to pay for it when his son is of age,
And therefore will I do it cunningly.
This letter, written by a friend of ours,
Contains his death, yet bids them save his life.
'Edwardum occidere nolite timere, bonum est;'
Fear not to kill the king, 'tis good he die.
But read it thus, and that's another sense:
'Edwardum occidere nolite, timere bonum est;'
Kill not the king, 'tis good to fear the worst.
Unpointed as it is, thus shall it go,
That, being dead, if it chance to be found,
Matrevis and the rest may bear the blame,
And we be quit that caused it to be done.
Within this room is locked the messenger
That shall convey it, and perform the rest.
And by a secret token that he bears,
Shall he be murdered when the deed is done.
Come forth, art thou so resolute as thou wast?
What else, my lord? and far more resolute.
And hast thou cast how to accomplish it?
Ay, ay, and none shall know which way he died.
But at his looks, Lightborn, thou wilt relent.
Relent? ha, ha! I use much to relent.
Well, do it bravely, and be secret.
You shall not need to give instructions;
'Tis not the first time I have killed a man:
I learned in Naples how to poison flowers;
To strangle with a lawn thrust down the throat;
To pierce the windpipe with a needle's point;
Or, whilst one is asleep, to take a quill
And blow a little powder in his ears;
Or open his mouth, and pour quicksilver down.
But yet I have a braver way than these.
Nay, you shall pardon me; none shall know my tricks.
I care not how it is, so it be not spied.
Deliver this to Gurney and Matrevis.
At every ten miles' end thou hast a horse.
Take this. Away, and never see me more!
No; unless thou bring me news of Edward's death.
That will I quickly do. Farewell, my lord.
The prince I rule, the queen do I command,
And with a lowly congee to the ground
The proudest lords salute me as I pass;
I seal, I cancel, I do what I will.
Feared am I more than loved; let me be feared,
And, when I frown, make all the court look pale.
I view the prince with Aristarchus' eyes,
Whose looks were as a breeching to a boy.
They thrust upon me the Protectorship
And sue to me for that that I desire.
While at the council table, grave enough,
And not unlike a bashful puritan,
First I complain of imbecility,
Saying it is onus quam gravissimum
Till, being interrupted by my friends,
Suscepi that provinciam, as they term it;
And, to conclude, I am Protector now.
Now is all sure: the Queen and Mortimer
Shall rule the realm, the king; and none rule us.
Mine enemies will I plague, my friends advance.
And what I list command who dare control?
Major sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.
And that this be the coronation day,
It pleaseth me and Isabel the Queen.
The trumpets sound; I must go take my place.
Long live king Edward, by the grace of God,
King of England and lord of Ireland!
If any Christian, Heathen, Turk, or Jew,
Dares but affirm that Edward's not true king,
And will avouch his saying with the sword,
I am the Champion that will combat him.
None comes. Sound, trumpets! Champion, here's to thee.
Lord Mortimer, now take him to your charge.
What traitor have we there with blades and bills?
Edmund, the Earl of Kent. What hath he done?
'A would have taken the king away perforce,
As we were bringing him to Killingworth.
Did you attempt his rescue, Edmund? speak.
Mortimer, I did: he is our king,
And thou compell'st this prince to wear the crown.
Strike off his head! he shall have martial law.
Strike off my head! base traitor, I defy thee!
My lord, he is my uncle, and shall live.
My lord, he is your enemy, and shall die.
Sweet mother, if I cannot pardon him,
Entreat my lord Protector for his life.
Son, be content; I dare not speak a word.
Nor I, and yet methinks I should command;
But, seeing I cannot, I'll entreat for him.
My lord, if you will let my uncle live,
I will requite it when I come to age.
'Tis for your highness' good and for the realm's.
How often shall I bid you bear him hence?
Art thou king? must I die at thy command?
At our command. once more away with him.
Let me but stay and speak; I will not go.
Either my brother or his son is king,
And none of both them thirst for Edmund's blood.
And therefore, soldiers, whither will you hale me?
What safety may I look for at his hands,
If that my Uncle shall be murdered thus?
Fear not, sweet boy; I'll guard thee from thy foes.
Had Edmund lived, he would have sought thy death.
Come, son, we'll ride ahunting in the park.
And shall my Uncle Edmund ride with us?
He is a traitor; think not on him, come.
Being in a vault up to the knees in water,
To which the channels of the castle run,
From whence a damp continually ariseth,
That were enough to poison any man,
Much more a king brought up so tenderly.
And so do I, Matrevis. yesternight
I opened but the door to throw him meat,
And I was almost stifled with the savor.
He hath a body able to endure
More than we can inflict, and therefore now
Let us assail his mind another while.
Send for him out thence, and I will anger him.
But stay, who's this? My lord protector greets you.
What's here? I know not how to conster it.
Gurney, it was left unpointed for the nonce;
'Edwardum occidere nolite timere,'
Know you this token? I must have the king.
Ay, stay a while; thou shalt have answer straight.
This villain's sent to make away the king.
I thought as much.  And when the murder's done,
See how he must be handled for his labor.
Pereat iste! let him have the king.
What else? Here is the keys, this is the lake.
Do as you are commanded by my lord.
I know what I must do. Get you away,
Yet be not far off; I shall need your help.
See that in the next room I have a fire,
And get me a spit, and let it be red-hot.
Very well.  Need you anything besides?
What else? a table and a feather bed.
Here's a light to go into the dungeon.
So, now must I about this gear. Ne'er was
There any so finely handled as this king shall be.
Foh, here's a place indeed, with all my heart. 
Who's there? what light is that? Wherefore com'st thou?
To comfort you and bring you joyful news.
Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks.
Villain, I know thou com'st to murder me.
To murder you, my most gracious lord?
Far is it from my heart to do you harm.
The Queen sent me to see how you were used,
For she relents at this your misery.
And what eyes can refrain from shedding tears
To see a king in this most piteous state?
Weep'st thou already? list a while to me,
And then thy heart, were it as Gurney's is,
Or as Matrevis', hewn from the Caucasus,
Yet will it melt ere I have done my tale.
This dungeon where they keep me is the sink
Wherein the filth of all the castle falls.
And there in mire and puddle have I stood
This ten days' space; and, lest that I should sleep,
One plays continually upon a Drum.
They give me bread and water, being a king;
So that, for want of sleep and sustenance,
My mind's distempered, and my body's numbed,
And whether I have limbs or no I know not.
O, would my blood dropped out from every vein,
As doth this water from my tattered robes.
Tell Isabel, the Queen, I looked not thus,
When for her sake I ran at tilt in France,
And there unhorsed the duke of Cleremont.
O, speak no more, my lord; this breaks my heart.
Lie on this bed, and rest yourself a while.
These looks of thine can harbor nought but death.
I see my tragedy written in thy brows.
Yet stay a while, forbear thy bloody hand,
And let me see the stroke before it comes,
That even then when I shall lose my life,
My mind may be more steadfast on my God.
What means your highness to mistrust me thus?
What means thou to dissemble with me thus?
These hands were never stained with innocent blood,
Nor shall they now be tainted with a king's.
Forgive my thought for having such a thought.
One jewel have I left; receive thou this.
Still fear I, and I know not what's the cause,
But every joint shakes as I give it thee.
O, if thou harbor'st murder in thy heart,
Let this gift change thy mind, and save thy soul.
Know that I am a king: o, at that name
I feel a hell of grief! where is my crown?
Gone, gone, and do I remain alive?
You're overwatched, my lord; lie down and rest.
But that grief keeps me waking, I should sleep;
For not these ten days have these eyelids closed.
Now as I speak they fall, and yet with fear
Open again. O wherefore sits thou here?
If you mistrust me, I'll be gone, my lord.
No, no, for if thou mean'st to murder me,
Thou wilt return again; and therefore stay.
O, let me not die yet. Stay, O stay a while!
Something still buzzeth in mine ears
And tells me if I sleep I never wake.
This fear is that which makes me tremble thus;
And therefore tell me, wherefore art thou come?
To rid thee of thy life. Matrevis, come!
I am too weak and feeble to resist.
Assist me, sweet God, and receive my soul!
O spare me, or dispatch me in a trice.
So, lay the table down, and stamp on it,
But not too hard, lest that you bruise his body.
I fear me that this cry will raise the town,
And therefore let us take horse and away.
Tell me, sirs, was it not bravely done?
Excellent well, take this for thy reward.
Come, let us cast the body in the moat,
And bear the king's to Mortimer our lord.
Is't done, Matrevis, and the murderer dead?
Ay, my good Lord: I would it were undone!
Matrevis, if thou now growest penitent
I'll be thy ghostly father; therefore choose,
Whether thou wilt be secret in this,
Or else die by the hand of Mortimer.
Gurney, my lord, is fled, and will, I fear,
Betray us both; therefore let me fly.
Fly to the Savages! I humbly thank your honor.
As for myself, I stand as Jove's huge tree,
And others are but shrubs compared to me:
All tremble at my name, and I fear none;
Let's see who dare impeach me for his death!
Ah, Mortimer, the king my son hath news
His father's dead, and we have murdered him!
What if we have? the king is yet a child.
Ay, ay, but he tears his hair, and wrings his hands.
And vows to be revenged upon us both.
Into the council chamber he is gone,
To crave the aid and succor of his peers.
Ay me, see where he comes, and they with him.
Now, Mortimer, begins our tragedy.
Fear not, my lord; know that you are a king.
Think not that I am frighted with Thy words.
My father's murdered through thy treachery;
And thou shalt die, and on his mournful hearse
Thy hateful and accursed head shall lie
To witness to the world that by thy means
His kingly body was too soon interred.
Forbid not me to weep; he was my father;
And had you loved him half so well as I,
You could not bear his death thus patiently.
But you, I fear, conspired with Mortimer.
Why speak you not unto my lord the king?
Because I think scorn to be accused.
Who is the man dares say I murdered him?
Traitor, in me my loving father speaks,
And plainly saith, 'twas thou that murdered'st him.
But hath your grace no other proof than this?
Yes, if this be the hand of Mortimer.
False Gurney hath betrayed me and himself.
I feared as much; murder cannot be hid.
'Tis my hand; what gather you by this?
That thither thou didst send a murderer.
What murderer? bring forth the man I sent.
Ah, Mortimer, thou knowest that he is slain;
And so shalt thou be too. Why stays he here?
Bring him unto a hurdle, drag him forth;
Hang him, I say, and set his quarters up,
And bring his head back presently to me.
For my sake, sweet son, pity Mortimer!
Madam, entreat not. I will rather die
Than sue for life unto a paltry boy.
Hence with the traitor, with the murderer!
Base fortune, now I see, that in thy wheel
There is a point, to which when men aspire,
They tumble headlong down. That point I touched,
And, seeing there was no place to mount up higher,
Why should I grieve at my declining fall?
Farewell, fair Queen, weep not for Mortimer,
That scorns the world, and, as a traveller,
Goes to discover countries yet unknown.
What! suffer you the traitor to delay?
As thou received'st thy life from me,
Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer.
This argues that you spilt my father's blood,
Else would you not entreat for Mortimer.
I spill his blood? no!
Ay, madam, you, for so the rumor runs.
That rumor is untrue: for loving thee,
Is this report raised on poor Isabel.
I do not think her so unnatural.
My lord, I fear me it will prove too true.
Mother, you are suspected for his death,
And therefore we commit you to the Tower
Till further trial may be made thereof.
If you be guilty, though I be your son,
Think not to find me slack or pitiful.
Nay, to my death, for too long have I lived,
Whenas my son thinks to abridge my days.
Away with her! her words enforce these tears,
And I shall pity her if she speak again.
Shall I not mourn for my beloved lord,
And with the rest accompany him to his grave?
Thus, madam, 'tis the king's will you shall hence.
He hath forgotten me, stay, I am his mother.
That boots not; therefore, gentle madam, go.
Then come, sweet death, and rid me of this grief.
My lord, here is the head of Mortimer.
Go fetch my father's hearse where it shall lie,
And bring my funeral robes. accursed head,
Could I have ruled thee then, as I do now,
Thou hadst not hatched this monstrous treachery!
Here comes the hearse. help me to mourn, my lords.
Sweet father, here unto thy murdered ghost
I offer up the wicked traitor's head,
And let these tears, distilling from mine eyes,
Be witness of my grief and innocency.
<mapavs.txt>
Prince of Navarre, my honorable brother,
Prince Conde, and my good Lord Admiral,
I wish this union and religious league,
Knit in these hands, thus joined in nuptial rites,
May not dissolve till death dissolve our lives;
And that the native sparks of princely love,
That kindled first this motion in our hearts,
May still be fueled in our progeny.
The many favors which your grace hath shown
From time to time, but specially in this,
Shall bind me ever to your highness' will
In what Queen Mother or your grace commands.
Thanks, son Navarre. you see we love you well,
That link you in marriage with our daughter here;
And, as you know, our difference in Religion
Might be a means to cross you in your love.
And now, my Lords, the marriage rites performed,
We think it good to go and consummate
The rest with hearing of a holy Mass.
Sister, I think yourself will bear us company.
Let us go to honor this solemnity.
Which I'll dissolve with blood and cruelty.
Prince Conde, and my good Lord Admiral,
Now Guise may storm, but do us little hurt,
Having the King, Queen Mother on our sides,
To stop the malice of his envious heart,
That seeks to murder all the Protestants.
Have you not heard of late how he decreed
If that the King had given consent thereto
That all the Protestants that are in Paris
Should have been murdered the other night?
My Lord, I marvel that th' aspiring Guise
Dares once adventure, without the King's consent,
To meddle or attempt such dangerous things.
My Lord, you need not marvel at the Guise,
For what he doth, the Pope will ratify,
In murder, mischief, or in tyranny.
But he that sits and rules above the clouds
Doth hear and see the prayers of the just,
And will revenge the blood of innocents,
That Guise hath slain by treason of his heart,
And brought by murder to their timeless ends.
My Lord, but did you mark the Cardinal,
The Guise's brother, and the duke Dumaine,
How they did storm at these your nuptial rites,
Because the house of Bourbon now comes in,
And joins your lineage to the crown of France?
And that's the cause that Guise so frowns at us,
And beats his brains to catch us in his trap,
Which he hath pitched within his deadly toil.
Come, my Lords, let's go to the church, and pray
That god may still defend the right of France,
And make his gospel flourish in this land. 
If ever Hymen low'red at marriage rites,
And had his altars decked with dusky lights;
If ever sun stained heaven with bloody clouds,
And made it look with terror on the world;
If ever day were turned to ugly night,
And night made semblance of the hue of hell;
This day, this hour, this fatal night,
Shall fully show the fury of them all.
Now shall I prove and guerdon to the full
The love thou bear'st unto the house of Guise.
Where are those perfumed gloves which I sent
To be poisoned? hast thou done them? speak!
Will every savor breed a pang of death?
I am, my Lord, in what your grace commands,
Thanks, my good friend; I will requite thy love.
Go, then, present them to the Queen Navarre,
For she is that huge blemish in our eye
That makes these upstart heresies in France.
Be gone, my friend, present them to her straight.
Now come thou forth, and play thy tragic part,
Stand in some window, opening near the street,
And when thou seest the Admiral ride by,
Discharge thy musket, and perform his death;
And then I'll guerdon thee with store of crowns.
Now, Guise, begin those deep engendered thoughts
To burst abroad those never dying flames
Which cannot be extinguished but by blood.
Oft have I leveled and at last have learned
That peril is the chiefest way to happiness,
And resolution honor's fairest aim.
What glory is there in a common good,
That hangs for every peasant to achieve?
That like I best that flies beyond my reach.
Set me to scale the high Pyramides,
And thereon set the Diadem of France.
I'll either rend it with my nails to nought,
Or mount the top with my aspiring wings,
Although my downfall be the deepest hell.
For this I wake, when others think I sleep;
For this I wait, that scorns attendance else;
For this, my quenchless thirst, whereon I build,
Hath often pleaded kindred to the King.
For this, this head, this heart, this hand, and sword,
Contrives, imagines, and fully executes,
Matters of import aimed at by many,
For this hath heaven engendered me of earth;
For this, this earth sustains my body's weight,
And with this weight I'll counterpoise a Crown,
Or with seditions weary all the world.
For this, from Spain the stately Catholics
Send indian gold to coin me French ecues;
For this have I a largess from the Pope,
A pension, and a dispensation too;
And by that privilege to work upon,
My policy hath framed religion.
Fie, I am ashamed, how ever that I seem,
To think a word of such a simple sound,
Of so great matter should be made the ground!
The gentle King, whose pleasure uncontrolled
Weakeneth his body, and will waste his Realm,
If I repair not what he ruinates,
Him, as a child, I daily win with words,
So that for proof he barely bears the name;
I execute, and he sustains the blame.
The Mother Queen works wonders for my sake,
And in my love entombs the hope of France,
Rifling the bowels of her treasury,
To supply my wants and necessity.
Paris hath full five hundred Colleges,
As Monasteries, Priories, Abbeys, and halls,
Wherein are thirty thousand able men,
Besides a thousand sturdy student Catholics;
And more, - of my knowledge, in one cloister keeps
Five hundred fat Franciscan Friars and priests:
All this, and more, if more may be comprised,
To bring the will of our desires to end.
Since thou hast all the Cards within thy hands,
To shuffle or cut, take this as surest thing,
That, right or wrong, thou deal thyself a King. -
Ay but, Navarre, Navarre. 'tis but a nook of France,
Sufficient yet for such a petty King,
That, with a rabblement of his heretics,
Blinds Europe's eyes, and troubleth our estate.

But first let's follow those in France,
That hinder our possession to the crown.
As Caesar to his soldiers, so say I,
Those that hate me will I learn to loathe.
Give me a look, that, when I bend the brows,
Pale death may walk in furrows of my face;
A hand, that with a grasp may gripe the world;
An ear to hear what my detractors say;
A royal seat, a sceptre, and a crown;
That those which do behold them may become
As men that stand and gaze against the Sun.
The plot is laid, and things shall come to pass
Where resolution strives for victory. 
I beseech your grace to accept this Simple gift.
Thanks my good friend, hold, take thou this reward.
Methinks the gloves have a very strong perfume,
The scent whereof doth make my head to ache.
Doth not your grace know the man that gave them you?
Not well; but do remember such a man.
Your grace was ill-advised to take them, then,
Considering of these dangerous times.
Help, son Navarre! I am poisoned!
The heavens forbid your highness such mishap!
The late suspicion of the Duke of Guise
Might well have moved your highness to beware
How you did meddle with such dangerous gifts.
Too late, it is, my Lord, if that be true,
To blame her highness; but I hope it be
Only some natural passion makes her sick.
O, no, sweet Margaret, the fatal poison
Works within my head; my brainpan breaks;
My Mother poisoned here before my face!
O gracious God, what times are these?
O, grant, sweet God, my days may end with hers,
That I with her may die and live again!
Let not this heavy chance, my dearest Lord,
(for whose effects my soul is massacred),
Infect thy gracious breast with fresh supply
To aggravate our sudden misery.
Come, my Lords, let us bear her body hence,
And see it honored with just solemnity.
What, are you hurt, my Lord high Admiral?
Ay, my good Lord, shot through the arm.
We are betrayed! come, my Lords, and let us
The cursed Guisians, that do seek our death.
O, fatal was this marriage to us all.

My noble son, and princely Duke of Guise,
Now have we got the fatal, straggling deer
Within the compass of a deadly toil,
And, as we late decreed, we may perform.
Madam, it will be noted through the world
An action bloody and tyrannical;
Chiefly, since under safety of our word
They justly challenge their protection:
Besides, my heart relents that noblemen,
Only corrupted in religion,
Ladies of honor, Knights, and Gentlemen,
Should, for their conscience, taste such ruthless ends.
Though gentle minds should pity others' pains,
Yet will the wisest note their proper griefs,
And rather seek to scourge their enemies
Than be themselves base subjects to the whip.
Methinks my Lord Anjou hath well advised
Your highness to consider of the thing,
And rather choose to seek your country's good
Than pity or relieve these upstart heretics.
I hope these reasons may serve my princely Son
To have some care for fear of enemies.
Well, Madam, I refer it to your Majesty,
And to my Nephew here, the Duke of Guise:
What you determine, I will ratify.
Thanks to my princely son. - then tell me, Guise,
What order will you set down for the Massacre?
They that shall be actors in this Massacre
Shall wear white crosses on their Burgonets,
And tie white linen scarfs about their arms.
He that wants these, and is suspect of heresy,
Shall die, be he King or Emperor. Then I'll have
A peal of ordnance shot from the tower, at which
They all shall issue out, and set the streets.
And then the watchword being given, a bell shall ring
Which when they hear, they shall begin to kill,
And never cease until that bell shall cease;
And it please your grace, the Lord high Admiral,
Riding the streets, was traitorously shot,
Messenger, tell him I will see him straight.
What shall we do now with the Admiral?
Your Majesty were best go visit him,
And make a show as if all were well.
Content; I will go visit the Admiral.
And I will go take order for his death.
How fares it with my Lord high Admiral?
Hath he been hurt with villains in the street?
I vow and swear as I am King of France,
To find and to repay the man with death,
With death delayed and torments never used,
That durst presume, for hope of any gain,
To hurt the noble man his sovereign loves.
 Ah, my good Lord, these are the Guisians,
That seek to massacre our guiltless lives!
 Assure yourself, my good Lord Admiral,
I deeply sorrow for your treacherous wrong;
And that I am not more secure myself
Than I am careful you should be preserved.
Cousin, take twenty of our strongest guard,
And under your direction see they keep
All treacherous violence from our noble friend,
Repaying all attempts with present death
Upon the cursed breakers of our peace. -
And so be patient, good Lord Admiral,
And every hour I will visit you.
I humbly thank your royal Majesty.
Anjou, Dumaine, Gonzago, Retes, swear
By the argent crosses in your burgonets,
To kill all that you suspect of heresy.
 I swear by this, to be unmerciful.
 I am disguised, and none knows who I am,
And therefore mean to murder all I meet.
Away, then! break into the Admiral's house.
Ay, let the Admiral be first dispatched.
Chief standard bearer to the Lutherans,
Shall in the entrance of this Massacre
Be murdered in his bed. Gonzago
Beset his house, that not a man may live.
 That charge is mine. Switzers, keep you the streets,
And at each corner shall the King's guard stand.
 Cousin, the Captain of the Admiral's guard,
Placed by my brother, will betray his Lord:
Now, Guise, shall catholics flourish once again;
The head being off, the members cannot stand.
 But look, my Lord, there's some in the Admiral's house.
 In lucky time! come, let us keep this lane,
And slay his servants that shall issue out.
 Then pray unto our Lady; kiss this cross.
It may be it is some other, and he escaped.
Cousin, 'tis he; I know him by his look.
See where my Soldier shot him through the arm.
He missed him near, but we have struck him now.
Ah, base Chatillon and degenerate,
Chief standard bearer to the Lutherans,
Thus, in despite of thy Religion,
The Duke of Guise stamps on thy lifeless bulk!
 Away with him! cut off his head and hands,
And send them for a present to the Pope;
And, when this just revenge is finished,
Unto mount Faucon will we drag his corpse;
And he, that living hated so the cross,
Shall, being dead, be hanged thereon in chains.
 Anjou, Gonzago, Retes, if that you three
Will be as resolute as I and Dumaine,
There shall not be a Huguenot breathe in France.
 I swear by this cross, we'll not be partial,
But slay as many as we can come near.
 Montsorrell, go shoot the ordnance off,
That they, which have already set the street,
May know their watchword; then toll the bell,
And so let's forward to the Massacre.
 And now, my Lords, let's closely to our business.
 Anjou will follow thee.  And so will Dumaine.
Let none escape, murder the Huguenots!
 Loreine, Loreine, follow Loreine! Sirrah,
Are you a preacher of these heresies?
 I am a preacher of the word of God;
And thou a traitor to thy soul and him.
 "dearly beloved brother," - thus 'tis written.
 Stay, my Lord, let me begin the psalm.
 Come, drag him away, and throw him in a ditch.
 Montsorrell, from the Duke of Guise.
 Husband, come down; here's one would speak with you
 To speak with me, from such a man as he?
 Ay, ay, for this, Seroune; and thou shalt hav't.
O, let me pray, before I take my death!
Why dar'st thou to presume to call on Christ,
Without the intercession of some Saint?
Sanctus Jacobus, he was my Saint; pray to him.
 What fearful cries come from the river Seine,
That fright poor Ramus sitting at his book?
I fear the Guisians have passed the bridge,
And mean once more to menace me.
 Fly, Ramus, fly, if thou wilt save thy life!
 Tell me, Taleus, wherefore should I fly?
Hard at thy door, and mean to murder us:
Hark, hark, they come, I'll leap out at the window.
 I am, as Ramus is, a Christian.
 O, let him go; he is a catholic. 
 Come, Ramus, more gold, or thou shalt have the stab.
I am a scholar, how should I have gold?
All that I have is but my stipend from the King,
Which is no sooner received but it is spent.
Wherein hath Ramus been so offensious?
 Marry, sir, in having a smack in all
And yet didst never sound anything to the depth.
Was it not thou that scoffed'st the Organon,
And said it was a heap of vanities?
He that will be a flat dichotomist,
And seen in nothing but Epitomes,
Is in your judgment thought a learned man.
And he, forsooth, must go and preach in Germany,
Excepting against Doctors' axioms,
And ipse dixi with this quiddity,
Argumentum testimonii est inartificiale.
To contradict which, I say, Ramus shall die.
How answer you that? your nego argumentum
Cannot serve. sirrah, kill him!
 O, good my Lord, let me but speak a word!
 Not for my life do I desire this pause;
But in my latter hour to purge myself,
In that I know the things that I have wrote,
Which, as I hear, one Scheckius takes it ill,
Because my places, being but three, contain all his.
I knew the Organon to be confused,
And I reduced it into better form.
And this for Aristotle will I say,
That he that despiseth him can ne'er
Be good in Logic or Philosophy.
And that's because the blockish Sorbonnists
Attribute as much unto their works
As to the service of the eternal God.
 Why suffer you that peasant to declaim?
Stab him, I say, and send him to his friends in hell.
 Ne'er was there Collier's son so full of pride.
Which we have chased into the river Seine,
That swim about, and so preserve their lives.
How may we do? I fear me they will live.
 Go place some men upon the bridge,
With bows and darts, to shoot at them they see,
And sink them in the river as they swim.
 'Tis well-advised, Dumaine; go see it straight
Be done, and, in the meantime, my Lord, could we
Devise to get those pedants from the King of Navarre,
That are tutors to him and the prince of Conde.
 For that, let me alone. Cousin, stay you here,
And when you see me in, then follow hard.
How now, my Lords, how fare you? My Lord, they say
That all the protestants are massacred.
 Ay, so they are; but yet, what remedy?
I have done what I could to stay this broil.
 But yet, my Lord, the report doth run,
That you were one that made this Massacre.
 Who I? you are deceived; I rose but now.
 Murder the Huguenots, take those pedants hence!
 Thou traitor, Guise, lay off thy bloody hands!
Come sirs, I'll whip you to death with my poniard's point. 
 And now, sirs, for this night let our fury stay.
Yet will we not that the Massacre shall end:
Gonzago, post you to Orleans, Retes to Dieppe,
Montsorrell unto Rouen, and spare not one
That you suspect of heresy. And now stay
That bell, that to the devil's matins rings.
Now every man put off his burgonet,
And so convey him closely to his bed. 
 My Lords of Poland, I must needs confess,
The offer of your Prince Elector's far
Beyond the reach of my deserts;
For Poland is, as I have been informed,
A martial people, worthy such a King
As hath sufficient counsel in himself
To lighten doubts, and frustrate subtle foes;
And such a King, whom practice long hath taught
To please himself with manage of the wars,
The greatest wars within our Christian bounds, -
I mean our wars against the Muscovites,
And, on the other side, against the Turk,
Rich Princes both, and mighty Emperors.
Yet, by my brother Charles, our King of France,
And by his grace's council, it is thought
That, if I undertake to wear the crown
Of Poland, it may prejudice their hope
Of my inheritance to the crown of France;
For, if th' almighty take my brother hence,
By due descent the Regal seat is mine.
With Poland, therefore, must I covenant thus,
That if, by death of Charles, the diadem
Of France be cast on me, then, with your leaves,
I may retire me to my native home.
If your commission serve to warrant this,
I thankfully shall undertake the charge
Of you and yours, and carefully maintain
The wealth and safety of your Kingdom's right.
 All this, and more, your highness shall command
For Poland's crown and Kingly diadem.
 Then, come, my Lords, let's go. 
Now, sirrah, what shall we do with the Admiral?
 Why, let us burn him for an heretic.
 O, no, his body will infect the fire, 
 No, no. to decide all doubts, be ruled by me:
let's hang him here upon this tree. Agreed. 
 Now, Madam, how like you our lusty Admiral?
 Believe me, Guise, he becomes the place so well
As I could long ere this have wished him there.
Sirs, take him away, and throw him in some ditch.
There are a hundred Huguenots and more,
Which in the woods do hold their synagogue,
And daily meet about this time of day;
And thither will I, to put them to the sword.
 Do so, sweet Guise; let us delay no time;
For, if these stragglers gather head again,
And disperse themselves throughout the Realm of France,
It will be hard for us to work their deaths.
Be gone; delay no time, sweet Guise. Madam,
I go as whirlwinds rage before a storm. 
 My Lord of Lorraine, have you marked of late
How Charles our son begins for to lament
For the late night's work which my Lord of Guise
Did make in Paris amongst the Huguenots?
 Madam, I have heard him solemnly vow,
With the rebellious King of Navarre,
For to revenge their deaths upon us all.
 Ay, but, my Lord, let me alone for that;
For Catherine must have her will in France:
As I do live, so surely shall he die,
And Henry then shall wear the diadem.
And, if he grudge or cross his mother's will,
I'll disinherit him and all the rest;
For I'll rule France, but they shall wear the crown,
And, if they storm, I then may pull them down.
That hath blasphemed the holy church of Rome,
Shall drive no plaints into the Guise's ears,
To make the justice of my heart relent:
Tuez, tuez, tuez, let none escape. 
 O, let me stay, and rest me here a while,
A griping pain hath seized upon my heart,
A sudden pang, the messenger of death.
 O, say not so, thou kill'st thy mother's heart.
 I must say so; pain forceth me complain.
 Comfort yourself, my Lord, and have no doubt
But God will sure restore you to your health.
 O, no, my loving brother of Navarre!
I have deserved a scourge, I must confess;
Yet is there patience of another sort
Than to misdo the welfare of their King:
God grant my nearest friends may prove no worse!
O, hold me up, my sight begins to fail,
My sinews shrink, my brains turn upside down;
My heart doth break: I faint and die. 
 What, art thou dead, sweet son? speak to thy Mother.
O, no, his soul is fled from out his breast,
And he nor hears nor sees us what we do:
My Lords, what resteth there now for to be done?
But that we presently dispatch Ambassadors
To Poland, to call Henry back again,
To wear his brother's crown and dignity.
Epernoun, go see it presently be done,
And bid him come without delay to us.
 And now, my Lords, after these funerals be done,
We will, with all the speed we can, provide
For Henry's coronation from Polony.
Come, let us take his body hence.
 And now, Pleshe, whilst that these broils do last,
My opportunity may serve me fit
To steal from France, and hie me to my home.
For here's no safety in the Realm for me.
And now that Henry is called from Poland,
It is my due, by just succession;
And therefore, as speedily as I can perform,
I'll muster up an army secretly,
For fear that Guise, joined with the King of Spain,
Might seek to cross me in mine enterprise.
But God, that always doth defend the right,
Will show his mercy, and preserve us still.
 The virtues of our true Religion
Cannot but march, with many graces more,
Whose army shall discomfort all your foes,
And, at the length, in Pampelonia crown
In spite of Spain, and all the popish power,
That holds it from your highness wrongfully:
Your Majesty her rightful Lord and Sovereign.
 Truth, Pleshe; and God so prosper me in all,
As I intend to labor for the truth,
And true profession of his holy word.
Come, Pleshe, let's away whilst time doth serve.
 Welcome from Poland, Henry, once again,
Welcome to France, thy father's royal seat.
Here hast thou a country void of fears,
A warlike people to maintain thy right,
A watchful Senate for ordaining laws,
A loving mother to preserve thy state,
And all things that a King may wish besides;
All this, and more, hath Henry with his crown.
 And long may Henry enjoy all this, and more!
 Thanks to you all. The guider of all crowns
Grant that our deeds may well deserve your loves:
And so they shall, if fortune speed my will,
And yield your thoughts to height of my deserts.
What say our Minions? think they Henry's heart
Will not both harbor love and Majesty?
Put off that fear, they are already joined:
No person, place, or time, or circumstance,
Shall slack my love's affection from his bent.
As now you are, so shall you still persist,
Removeless from the favors of your King.
 We know that noble minds change not their thoughts
For wearing of a crown, in that your grace
Hath worn the Poland diadem, before
You were invested in the crown of France.
 I tell thee, Mugeroun, we will be friends,
And fellows too, whatever storms arise.
 Then may it please your majesty to give me leave
To punish those that do profane this holy feast.
 How mean'st thou that? O Lord, mine ear!
 Come, sir, give me my buttons, and here's your ear.
 Hands off, good fellow; I will be his bail
For this offense. go, sirrah, work no more
Till this our Coronation day be past.
Our solemn rites of Coronation done,
What now remains but for a while to feast,
And spend some days in barriers, tourney, tilt,
And like disports, such as do fit the Court?
Let's go, my Lords; our dinner stays for us.
 My Lord Cardinal of Lorraine, tell me,
How likes your grace my son's pleasantness?
His mind, you see, runs on his minions,
And all his heaven is to delight himself;
And, whilst he sleeps securely thus in ease,
Thy brother Guise and we may now provide
To plant ourselves with such authority
As not a man may live without our leaves.
Then shall the Catholic faith of Rome
Flourish in France, and none deny the same.
 Madam, as in secrecy I was told,
My brother Guise hath gathered a power of men,
Which are, he saith, to kill the Puritans;
But 'tis the house of Bourbon that he means.
Now, Madam, must you insinuate with the King,
And tell him that 'tis for his country's good,
And common profit of Religion.
 Tush, man, let me alone with him,
To work the way to bring this thing to pass;
And, if he do deny what I do say,
I'll dispatch him with his brother presently,
And then shall Monsieur wear the diadem.
Tush, all shall die unless I have my will;
For, while she lives, Catherine will be Queen.
Come, my Lord, let us go seek the Guise,
And then determine of this enterprise. 
 Go fetch me pen and ink... I will, madam. 
 That I may write unto my dearest Lord.
Sweet Mugeroun, 'tis he that hath my heart,
And Guise usurps it 'cause I am his wife.
Fain would I find some means to speak with him,
But cannot, and therefore am enforced to write,
That he may come and meet me in some place,
Where we may one enjoy the other's sight.
So, set it down, and leave me to myself.
O, would to God, this quill that here doth write,
Had late been plucked from out fair Cupid's wing,
That it might print these lines within his heart!
 What, all alone, my love? and writing too?
I prithee, say to whom thou writ'st?
 To such a one my Lord, as when she reads My lines,
Will laugh, I fear me, at their good array.
 O, no my Lord; a woman only must
Partake the secrets of my heart.
Are these your secrets that no man must know?
 Thou trothless and unjust, what lines are these?
Am I grown old, or is thy lust grown young,
Or hath my love been so obscured in thee,
That others need to comment on my text?
Is all my love forgot, which held thee dear?
Ay, dearer than the apple of mine eye?
Is Guise's glory but a cloudy mist,
In sight and judgment of thy lustful eye?
Mort dieu! were not the fruit within thy womb,
Of whose increase I set some longing hope,
This wrathful hand should strike thee to the heart.
Hence, strumpet, hide thy head for shame;
And fly my presence, if thou look to live! 
O wicked sex, perjured and unjust,
Now do I see that from the very first
Her eyes and looks sowed seeds of perjury,
But villain, he, to whom these lines should go,
Shall buy her love even with his dearest blood.
My Lords, sith in a quarrel just and right
We undertake to manage these our wars
Against the proud disturbers of the faith,
I mean the Guise, the Pope, and King of Spain,
Who set themselves to tread us under foot,
And rent our true religion from this land;
But for you know our quarrel is no more
But to defend their strange inventions,
Which they will put us to with sword and fire,
We must with resolute minds resolve to fight,
In honor of our God, and country's good.
Spain is the council chamber of the pope,
Spain is the place where he makes peace and war;
And Guise for Spain hath now incensed the King
To send his power to meet us in the field.
 Then in this bloody brunt they may behold
The sole endeavor of your princely care,
To plant the true succession of the faith,
In spite of Spain and all his heresies.
 The power of vengeance now encamps itself
Upon the haughty mountains of my breast;
Plays with her gory colors of revenge,
Whom I respect as leaves of boasting green,
That change their color when the winter comes,
When I shall vaunt as victor in revenge.
 My Lord, as by our scouts we understand,
A mighty army comes from France with speed;
Which are already mustered in the land,
And means to meet your highness in the field.
 In God's name, let them come!
This is the Guise that hath incensed the King
To levy arms, and make these civil broils.
But canst thou tell who is their general?
 Not yet, my Lord, for thereon do they stay;
But, as report doth go, the Duke of Joyeux
Hath made great suit unto the King therefore.
 It will not countervail his pains, I hope.
I would the Guise in his stead might have come,
But he doth lurk within his drowsy couch,
And makes his footstool on security:
So he be safe, he cares not what becomes
Of King or Country; no, not for them both.
But come, my Lords, let us away with speed,
And place ourselves in order for the fight. 
 My sweet Joyeux, I make thee General
Of all my army, now in readiness
To march against the rebellious King Navarre.
At thy request I am content thou go,
Although my love to thee can hardly suffer it,
Regarding still the danger of thy life.
Thanks to your Majesty: and, so I take my leave.
Farewell to my Lord of Guise and Epernoun.
 Health and hearty farewell to my Lord Joyeux.
 So kindly, Cousin of Guise, you and your wife
Do both salute our lovely Minions.
Remember you the letter, gentle sir,
To my dear Minion, and her chosen friend?
 How now, my Lord! faith, this is more than need.
Am I thus to be jested at and scorned?
'Tis more than Kingly or Imperious.
And, sure, if all the proudest Kings
In Christendom should bear me such derision,
They should know how I scorned them and their mocks.
I love your Minions? dote on them yourself;
I know none else but holds them in disgrace,
And here, by all the Saints in heaven, I swear,
That villain for whom I bear this deep disgrace,
Even for your words that have incensed me so,
Shall buy that strumpet's favor with his blood,
Whether he have dishonored me or no,
Par la mort dieu, il mourra! 
 Believe me, this jest bites sore.
 My Lord, 'twere good to make them friends,
For his oaths are seldom spent in vain.
For he hath solemnly sworn thy death.
 I may be stabbed, and live till he be dead:
But wherefore bears he me such deadly hate?
 Because his wife bears thee such kindly love.
 If that be all, the next time that I meet her,
I'll make her shake off love with her heels.
But which way is he gone? I'll go make a walk
On purpose from the Court to meet with him. 
 I like not this. come, Epernoun,
Let us go seek the Duke, and make them friends.
 The Duke is slain, and all his power dispersed,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
Thus God, we see, doth ever guide the right,
To make his glory great upon the earth.
 The terror of this happy victory,
I hope, will make the King surcease his hate,
And either never manage army more,
Or else employ them in some better cause.
 How many noblemen have lost their lives
In prosecution of these cruel arms,
Is ruth, and almost death, to call to mind:
But God we know will always put them down
That lift themselves against the perfect truth;
Which I'll maintain so long as life doth last,
And with the Queen of England join my force
To beat the papal Monarch from our lands,
And keep those relics from our country's coasts.
Come, my Lords; now that this storm is overpast,
Let us away with triumph to our tents. 
What, are ye come so soon? have at ye, sir!
Hold thee, tall Soldier, take thee this and fly.
Lie there, the King's delight, and Guise's scorn!
Revenge it, Henry, as thou list or dare;
I did it only in despite of thee. 
That you have gathered a power of men.
What your intent is yet we cannot learn,
But we presume it is not for our good.
 Why, I am no traitor to the crown of France.
What I have done, 'tis for the Gospel's sake.
 Nay, for the Pope's sake, and thine own benefit.
What Peer in France, but thou (aspiring Guise)
Durst be in arms, without the King's consent?
I challenge thee for treason in the cause.
 Ah, base Epernoun! were not his highness here,
Thou shouldst perceive the Duke of Guise is moved.
 Be patient, Guise, and threat not Epernoun,
Lest thou perceive the King of France be moved.
 Why, I'm a Prince of the Valois line,
Therefore an enemy to the Bourbonites.
I am a juror in the holy league,
And therefore hated of the Protestants.
What should I do but stand upon my guard?
And, being able, I'll keep an host in pay.
 Thou able to maintain an host in pay,
That liv'st by foreign exhibition!
The Pope and King of Spain are thy good friends;
Else all France knows how poor a Duke thou art.
 Ay, those are they that feed him with their gold,
To countermand our will, and check our friends.
 My Lord, to speak more plainly, thus it is:
Being animated by Religious zeal,
I mean to muster all the power I can,
To overthrow those sectious Puritans:
And know, my Lord, the Pope will sell his triple crown,
Ay, and the Catholic Philip, King of Spain,
Ere I shall want, will cause his Indians
To rip the golden bowels of America.
Navarre, that cloaks them underneath his wings,
Shall feel the house of Lorraine is his foe.
Your highness needs not fear mine army's force;
'tis for your safety, and your enemies' wrack.
 Guise, wear our crown, and be thou King of France
And, as dictator, make or war or peace,
Whilst I cry "placet," like a Senator!
I cannot brook thy haughty insolence:
Dismiss thy camp, or else by our Edict
Be thou proclaimed a traitor throughout France.
 The choice is hard; I must dissemble.
My Lord, in token of my true humility,
And simple meaning to your Majesty,
I kiss your grace's hand, and take my leave,
Intending to dislodge my camp with speed.
Then farewell, Guise, the King and thou are friends.
For had your highness seen with what a pomp
He entered Paris and how the Citizens
With gifts and shows did entertain him,
And promised to be at his command?
Nay, they feared not to speak in the streets,
That the Guise durst stand in arms against the King,
For not effecting of his holiness' will.
 Did they of Paris entertain him so?
Then means he present treason to our state.
Well, let me alone. - who's within there?

Make a discharge of all my council straight,
And I'll subscribe my name, and seal it straight.
My head shall be my council; they are false;
And, Epernoun, I will be ruled by thee.
I think, for safety of your royal person,
It would be good the Guise were made away,
And so to quite your grace of all suspect.
 First let us set our hand and seal to this,
And then I'll tell thee what I mean to do.
So, convey this to the council presently. 
And, Epernoun, though I seem mild and calm,
Think not but I am tragical within.
I'll secretly convey me unto Blois;
For, now that Paris takes the Guise's part,
Here is no staying for the King of France,
Unless he mean to be betrayed and die:
But, as I live, so sure the Guise shall die. 
 My Lord, I am advertised from France
That the Guise hath taken arms against the King,
And that Paris is revolted from his grace.
 Then hath your grace fit opportunity
To show your love unto the King of France,
Offering him aid against his enemies,
Which cannot but be thankfully received.
 Bartus, it shall be so: post, then, to France,
And there salute his highness in our name;
Assure him all the aid we can provide
Against the Guisians and their complices.
Bartus, be gone: commend me to his grace,
And tell him, ere it be long, I'll visit him.
 Pleshe, go muster up our men with speed,
And let them march away to France amain,
For we must aid the King against the Guise.
Be gone, I say; 'tis time that we were there.
 That wicked Guise, I fear me much will be
The ruin of that famous Realm of France;
For his aspiring thoughts aim at the crown,
And takes his vantage on Religion,
To plant the Pope and popelings in the Realm,
And bind it wholly to the See of Rome;
But, if that God do prosper mine attempts,
And send us safely to arrive in France,
We'll beat him back, and drive him to his death,
That basely seeks the ruin of his Realm. 
 Come on, sirs, what, are you resolutely bent,
Hating the life and honor of the Guise?
What, will you not fear, when you see him come?
 Ay, ay, fear not. stand close, so, be resolute.
Now falls the star whose influence governs France,
Whose light was deadly to the Protestants;
Now must he fall and perish in his height.
 Now, Captain of my guard, are these murderers ready?
 But are they resolute, and armed to kill,
Hating the life and honor of the Guise?
 Then come, proud Guise, and here disgorge thy breast,
Surcharged with surfeit of ambitious thoughts;
Breathe out that life wherein my death was hid,
And end thy endless treasons with thy death.
 I prithee, tell him that the Guise is here.
 And please your grace, the Duke of Guise doth crave
Access unto your highness. Let him come in.
Come, Guise, and see thy traitorous guile outreached,
And perish in the pit thou mad'st for me.
 Good morrow to my loving Cousin of Guise.
How fares it this morning with your excellence?
 I heard your Majesty was scarcely pleased,
That in the Court I bare so great a train.
 They were to blame that said I was displeased;
And you, good Cousin, to imagine it.
'twere hard with me, if I should doubt my kin,
Or be suspicious of my dearest friends.
Cousin, assure you I am resolute,
Whatsoever any whisper in mine ears,
Not to suspect disloyalty in thee:
Now sues the King for favor to the Guise,
And all his Minions stoop when I command.
Why, this 'tis to have an army in the field.
Now, by the holy sacrament, I swear,
As ancient Romans over their Captive Lords,
So will I triumph over this wanton King;
And he shall follow my proud Chariot's wheels.
Now do I but begin to look about,
And all my former time was spent in vain.
For in thee is the Duke of Guise's hope.
Villain, why dost thou look so ghastly? speak.
Let mean conceits and baser men fear death!
But, they are peasants; I am Duke of Guise;
And princes with their looks engender fear.
 O, I have my death's wound, give me leave to speak.
 Then pray to God, and ask forgiveness of the King.
 Trouble me not; I ne'er offended him,
Nor will I ask forgiveness of the King.
O, that I have not power to stay my life,
Nor immortality to be revenged:
To die by Peasants, what a grief is this!
Ah, Sextus, be revenged upon the King,
Philip and Parma, I am slain for you:
Pope, excommunicate, Philip, depose
The wicked branch of cursed Valois his line!
Vive la messe, perish Huguenots,
Thus Caesar did go forth, and thus he died. 
Then stay a while, and I'll go call the King,
My Lord, see, where the Guise is slain.
 Ah, this sweet sight is physic to my soul,
Go fetch his son for to behold his death.
Surcharged with guilt of thousand massacres,
Monsieur of Lorraine, sink away to hell!
And, in remembrance of those bloody broils,
To which thou didst allure me, being alive:
And here in presence of you all, I swear,
I ne'er was King of France until this hour.
This is the traitor that hath spent my gold
In making foreign wars and civil broils.
Did he not draw a sort of English priests
From Douay to the Seminary at Rheims.
To hatch forth treason 'gainst their natural Queen?
Did he not cause the King of Spain's huge fleet
To threaten England, and to menace me?
Did he not injure Monsieur that's deceased?
Hath he not made me, in the Pope's defense,
To spend the treasure, that should strength my land,
In civil broils between Navarre and me?
Tush, to be short, he meant to make me Monk,
Or else to murder me, and so be King.
Let Christian princes, that shall hear of this,
(As all the world shall know our Guise is dead),
Rest satisfied with this, that here I swear,
Ne'er was there King of France so yoked as I.
 Away to prison with him! I'll clip his wings
Or e'er he pass my hands: away with him. 
But what availeth that this traitor's dead,
When Duke Dumaine, his brother, is alive,
And that young Cardinal that is grown so proud?
Go to the Governor of Orleans,
And will him, in my name, to kill the Duke.
Get you away, and strangle the Cardinal.
These two will make one entire Duke of Guise,
Especially with our old mother's help.
 My Lord, see, where she comes, as if she drooped
 And let her droop, my heart is light enough.
Mother, how like you this device of mine?
I slew the Guise, because I would be King.
 King, why, so thou wert before.
Pray God thou be a King now this is done!
 Nay, he was King, and countermanded me;
But now I will be King, and rule myself,
And make the Guisians stoop that are alive.
 I cannot speak for grief: when thou wast born,
I would that I had murdered thee, my son!
My son? thou art a changeling, not my son.
I curse thee, and exclaim thee miscreant,
Traitor to God and to the realm of France!
 Cry out, exclaim, howl till thy throat be hoarse,
The Guise is slain, and I rejoice therefore.
And now will I to arms. come, Epernoun,
And let her grieve her heart out, if she will.
 Away, leave me alone to meditate.
Sweet Guise, would he had died, so thou wert here.
To whom shall I bewray my secrets now,
Or who will help to build Religion?
The Protestants will glory and insult;
Wicked Navarre will get the crown of France:
The Popedom cannot stand; all goes to wrack;
And all for thee, my Guise, what may I do?
But sorrow seize upon my toiling soul,
For, since the Guise is dead, I will not live.
 Yet lives my brother Duke Dumaine, and many moe,
To revenge our deaths upon that cursed King,
Upon whose heart may all the furies gripe,
And with their paws drench his black soul in hell!
 My noble brother murdered by the King,
O, what may I do for to revenge thy death?
The King's alone, it cannot satisfy.
Sweet Duke of Guise, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art dead, here is no stay for us.
I am thy brother, and I'll revenge thy death,
And root Valois his line from forth of France;
And beat proud Bourbon to his native home,
That basely seeks to join with such a King,
Whose murderous thoughts will be his overthrow.
He willed the Governor of Orleans, in his name,
That I with speed should have been put to death.
But that's prevented, for to end his life,
And all those traitors to the Church of Rome
That durst attempt to murder noble Guise.
 My brother Cardinal slain, and I alive?
O words of power to kill a thousand men!
Come, let us away, and levy men.
'tis war that must assuage this tyrant's pride.
 My Lord, hear me but speak,
I am a Friar of the order of the Jacobins,
That for my conscience' sake will kill the King.
 But what doth move thee, above the rest, to do the deed?
 Brother of Navarre, I sorrow much
That ever I was proved your enemy,
And that the sweet and princely mind you bear
Was ever troubled with injurious wars:
I vow, as I am lawful King of France,
To recompense your reconciled love
With all the honors and affections
That ever I vouchsafed my dearest friends.
 It is enough if that Navarre may be
Esteemed faithful to the King of France,
Whose service he may still command till death.
 Thanks to my Kingly Brother of Navarre.
Then here we'll lie before Lutetia walls,
Girting this strumpet City with our siege,
Till, surfeiting with our afflicting arms,
She cast her hateful stomach to the earth.
'Twere not amiss, my Lord, if he were searched.
 Sweet Epernoun, our Friars are holy men,
And will not offer violence to their King,
For all the wealth and treasure of the world.
Friar, thou dost acknowledge me thy King?
 Ay, my good Lord, and will die therein.
 Then come thou near, and tell what news thou bring'st.
The President of Paris greets your grace
And sends his duty by these speedy lines,
Humbly craving your gracious reply.
 I'll read them, Friar, and then I'll answer thee.
 Yes, Navarre; but not to death, I hope.
 God shield your grace from such a sudden death!
Go call a surgeon hither straight.
 What irreligious Pagans' parts be these,
Of such as hold them of the holy church?
Take hence that damned villain from my sight.
 Ah, had your highness let him live,
We might have punished him to his deserts!
 Sweet Epernoun, all Rebels under heaven
Shall take example by his punishment,
How they bear arms against their sovereign. -
Go call the English Agent hither straight:
I'll send my sister England news of this,
And give her warning of her treacherous foes.
 Pleaseth your grace to let the Surgeon search your wound?
 The wound, I warrant ye, is deep, my Lord,
Search, surgeon, and resolve me what thou seest.
Agent for England, send thy mistress word
What this detested Jacobin hath done.
Tell her, for all this, that I hope to live;
Which if I do, the Papal Monarch goes
To wrack, and antichristian Kingdom falls.
These bloody hands shall tear his triple Crown,
And fire accursed Rome about his ears.
I'll fire his crazed buildings, and enforce
The papal towers to kiss the lowly earth. -
Navarre, give me thy hand. I here do swear
To ruinate that wicked Church of Rome,
That hatcheth up such bloody practices,
And here protest eternal love to thee,
And to the Queen of England specially,
Whom God hath blest for hating papistry.
 These words revive my thoughts, and comfort me,
To see your highness in this virtuous mind.
 Alas, my Lord, the wound is dangerous,
For you are stricken with a poisoned knife!
 A poisoned knife! what, shall the French King die,
Wounded and poisoned both at once?
 O, that that damned villain were alive again,
That we might torture him with some new found death.
 He died a death too good! the devil of hell
 Ah, curse him not, sith he is dead. O,
The fatal poison works within my breast,
Tell me, Surgeon, and flatter not, may I live?
 Alas, my Lord, your highness cannot live!
 Surgeon, why say'st thou so? the King may live.
 O no, Navarre! thou must be King of France!
 Long may you live, and still be King of France.
 Sweet Epernoun, thy King must die. My Lords
Fight in the quarrel of this valiant Prince,
For he is your lawful King, and my next heir;
Valois's line ends in my tragedy.
Now let the house of Bourbon wear the crown;
And may it never end in blood, as mine hath done.
Weep not, sweet Navarre, but revenge my death. -
Ah, Epernoun, is this thy love to me?
Henry, thy King, wipes off these childish tears,
And bids thee whet thy sword on Sextus' bones,
That it may keenly slice the Catholics.
He loves me not the most that sheds most tears,
But he that makes most lavish of his blood.
Fire Paris, where these treacherous rebels lurk.
I die, Navarre; come bear me to my Sepulcher.
Salute the Queen of England in my name,
And tell her, Henry dies her faithful friend.
 Come, Lords, take up the body of the King,
That we may see it honorably interred:
And then I vow so to revenge his death
As Rome, and all those popish Prelates there,
Shall curse the time that e'er Navarre was King,
And ruled in France by Henry's fatal death.
Thus falls imperfect exhalation,
Which our great son of France could not effect;
A fiery meteor in the firmament.
Lie there, the king's delight and Guise's scorn!
Revenge it, Henry, if thou list or dar'st;
I did it only in despite of thee.
Fondly hast thou incensed the Guise's soul
That of itself was hot enough to work
Thy just digestion with extremest shame.
The army I have gathered now shall aim
Now, at thy end, thine extirpation;
And when thou think'st I have forgotten this,
And that thou most reposest on my faith,
Then will I wake thee from thy foolish dream
And let thee see thyself my prisoner. 
<DIDOVS>
Come, gentle Ganymede, and play with me.
I love thee well, say Juno what she will.
I am much better for your worthless love,
That will not shield me from her shrewish blows.
Today, whenas I filled into your cups
And held the cloth of pleasance while you drank,
She reached me such a rap for that I spilled,
As made the blood run down about mine ears.
What? dares she strike the darling of my thoughts?
By Saturn's soul, and this earth threat'ning hair,
That, shaken thrice, makes Nature's buildings quake,
I vow, if she but once frown on thee more,
To hang her, meteor-like, 'twixt heaven and earth,
And bind her, hand and foot, with golden cords,
As once I did for harming Hercules.
Might I but see that pretty sport afoot,
O, how would I with Helen's brother laugh,
And bring the Gods to wonder at the game.
Sweet Jupiter, if e'er I pleased thine eye
Or seemed fair, walled in with Eagle's wings,
Grace my immortal beauty with this boon,
And I will spend my time in thy bright arms.
What is't, sweet wag, I should deny thy youth,
Whose face reflects such pleasure to mine eyes,
As I, exhaled with thy fire darting beams,
Have oft driven back the horses of the night,
Whenas they would have haled thee from my sight.
Sit on my knee and call for thy content;
Control proud Fate and cut the thread of time.
Why, are not all the Gods at thy command
And heaven and earth the bounds of thy delight?
Vulcan shall dance to make thee laughing sport,
And my nine Daughters sing when thou art sad.
From Juno's bird I'll pluck her spotted pride
To make thee fans wherewith to cool thy face,
And Venus' Swans shall shed their silver down
To sweeten out the slumbers of thy bed.
Hermes no more shall show the world his wings,
If that thy fancy in his feathers dwell,
But, as this one, I'll tear them all from him,
Do thou but say, "their color pleaseth me."
Hold here, my little love. These linked gems
My Juno ware upon her marriage day,
Put thou about thy neck, my own sweet heart,
And trick thy arms and shoulders with my theft.
I would have a jewel for mine ear
And a fine brooch to put in my hat,
And then I'll hug with you an hundred times.
And shall have, Ganymede, if thou wilt be my love.

Ay, this is it! you can sit toying there
And playing with that female wanton boy,
While my Aeneas wanders on the Seas
And rests a prey to every billow's pride.
Juno, false Juno, in her Chariot's pomp,
Drawn through the heavens by Steeds of Boreas' brood,
Made Hebe to direct her airy wheels
Into the windy country of the clouds,
Where, finding Aeolus entrenched with storms
And guarded with a thousand grisly ghosts,
She humbly did beseech him for our bane,
And charged him drown my son with all his train.
Then gan the winds break ope their brazen doors
And all Aeolia to be up in arms
Poor Troy must now be sacked upon the Sea,
And Neptune's waves be envious men of war;
Epeus' horse, to Aetna's hill transformed,
Prepared stands to wrack their wooden walls,
And Aeolus, like Agamemnon, sounds
The surges, his fierce soldiers, to the spoil.
See how the night, Ulysses-like, comes forth
And intercepts the day, as Dolon erst.
Ay me! the Stars surprised, like Rhesus' Steeds,
Are drawn by darkness forth Astraeus' tents.
What shall I do to save thee, my sweet boy,
Whenas the waves do threat our Crystal world,
And Proteus, raising hills of floods on high,
Intends ere long to sport him in the sky?
False Jupiter, reward'st thou virtue so?
What? is not piety exempt from woe?
Then die Aeneas in thine innocence,
Since that religion hath no recompense.
Content thee, Cytherea, in thy care,
Since thy Aeneas' wandering fate is firm,
Whose weary limbs shall shortly make repose
In those fair walls I promised him of yore.
But first in blood must his good fortune bud,
Before he be the Lord of Turnus' town,
Or force her smile that hitherto hath frowned.
Three winters shall he with the Rutiles war,
And in the end subdue them with his sword;
And full three Summers likewise shall he waste
In managing those fierce barbarian minds,
Which once performed, poor Troy, so long suppressed,
From forth her ashes shall advance her head,
And flourish once again, that erst was dead.
But bright Ascanius, beauty's better work,
Who with the Sun divides one radiant shape,
Shall build his throne amidst those starry towers
That earth-born Atlas, groaning, underprops.
No bounds but heaven shall bound his Empery,
Whose azured gates enchased with his name,
Shall make the morning haste her gray uprise
To feed her eyes with his engraven fame.
Thus in stout Hector's race thee hundred years
The Roman Scepter royal shall remain,
Till that a Princess priest conceived by Mars,
Shall yield to dignity a double birth,
Who will eternize Troy in their attempts.
How may I credit these thy flattering terms,
When yet both sea and sands beset their ships,
And Phoebus, as in Stygian pools, refrains
To taint his tresses in the Tyrrhene main?
I will take order for that presently.
Hermes awake, and haste to Neptune's realm,
Whereas the Wind-god, warring now with Fate,
Besiege the offspring of our kingly loins.
Charge him from me to turn his stormy powers
And fetter them in Vulcan's sturdy brass,
That durst thus proudly wrong our kinsman's peace.
Venus, farewell; thy son shall be our care.
Come, Ganymede, we must about this gear.
Disquiet Seas, lay down your swelling looks,
And court Aeneas with your calmy cheer,
Whose beauteous burden well might make you proud,
Had not the heavens, conceived with hell-born clouds,
Veiled his resplendent glory from your view.
For my sake pity him, Oceanus,
That erstwhile issued from thy wat'ry loins
And had my being from thy bubbling froth.
Triton, I know, hath filled his trump with Troy,
And therefore will take pity on his toil,
And call both Thetis and Cymothoe
To succor him in this extremity.
What? do I see my son now come on shore?
Venus, how art thou compassed with content,
The while thine eyes attract their sought for joys.
Great Jupiter, still honored mayst thou be
For this so friendly aid in time of need.
Here in this bush disguised will I stand,
While my Aeneas spends himself in plaints,
And heaven and earth with his unrest acquaints.
You sons of care, companions of my course,
Priam's misfortune follows us by sea,
And Helen's rape doth haunt ye at the heels.
How many dangers have we overpassed!
Both barking Scylla and the sounding Rocks,
The Cyclops' shelves, and grim Ceraunia's seat
Have you o'ergone and yet remain alive?
Pluck up your hearts, since fate still rests our friend,
And changing heavens may those good days return,
Which Pergama did vaunt in all her pride.
Brave Prince of Troy, thou only art our God,
That by thy virtues freest us from annoy.
And mak'st our hopes survive to coming joys.
Do thou but smile and cloudy heaven will clear,
Whose night and day descendeth from thy brows.
Though we be now in extreme misery
And rest the map of weather-beaten woe,
Yet shall the aged Sun shed forth his hair
To make us live unto our former heat,
And every beast the forest doth send forth
Bequeath her young ones to our scanted food.
Father, I faint. Good father, give me meat.
Alas, sweet boy, thou must be still a while,
Till we have fire to dress the meat we killed.
Gentle Achates, reach the Tinder box,
That we may make a fire to warm us with
And roast our new found victuals on this shore.
See what strange arts necessity finds out.
How near, my sweet Aeneas, art thou driven!
Hold, take this candle and go light a fire.
You shall have leaves and windfall boughs enow,
Near to these woods, to roast your meat withal.
Ascanius, go and dry thy drenched limbs,
While I with my Achates rove abroad,
To know what coast the wind hath driven us on,
Or whether men or beasts inhabit it.
The air is pleasant, and the soil most fit
For Cities' and society's supports;
Yet much I marvel that I cannot find
No steps of men imprinted in the earth.
Now is the time for me to play my part.
Ho, young men! saw you as you came
Any of all my Sisters wandering here,
Having a quiver girded to her side
And clothed in a spotted Leopard's skin?
I neither saw nor heard of any such.
But what may I, fair Virgin, call your name,
Whose looks set forth no mortal form to view,
Nor speech bewrays aught human in thy birth?
Thou art a Goddess that delud'st our eyes
And shroud'st thy beauty in this borrowed shape,
But whether thou the Sun's bright Sister be,
Or one of chaste Diana's fellow Nymphs,
Live happy in the height of all content,
And lighten our extremes with this one boon,
As to instruct us under what good heaven
We breathe as now, and what this world is called
On which by tempest's fury we are cast.
Tell us, O, tell us, that are ignorant,
And this right hand shall make thy Altars crack
With mountain heaps of milk-white Sacrifice.
Such honor, stranger, do I not affect.
It is the use for Tyrian maids to wear
Their bow and quiver in this modest sort
And suit themselves in purple for the nonce,
That they may trip more lightly o'er the lawns,
And overtake the tusked Boar in chase.
But for the land whereof thou dost inquire,
It is the Punic kingdom, rich and strong,
Adjoining on Agenor's stately town,
The kingly seat of Southern Libya,
Whereas Sidonian Dido rules as Queen.
But what are you that ask of me these things?
Whence may you come, or whither will you go?
Of Troy am I. Aeneas is my name,
Who driven by war from forth my native world,
Put sails to sea to seek out Italy;
And my divine descent from sceptered Jove.
With twice twelve Phrygian ships I plowed the deep
And made that way my mother Venus led,
But of them all scarce seven do anchor safe,
And they so wracked and weltered by the waves,
As every tide tilts 'twixt their oaken sides.
And all of them, unburdened of their load,
Are ballasted with billows' wat'ry weight.
But hapless I, God wot, poor and unknown,
Do trace these Libyan deserts all despised,
Exiled forth Europe and wide Asia both,
And have not any coverture but heaven.
Fortune hath favored thee, whate'er thou be,
In sending thee unto this Courteous coast.
A God's name on, and haste thee to the court,
Where Dido will receive ye with her smiles.
And for thy ships, which thou supposest lost,
Not one of them hath perished in the storm,
But are arrived safe not far from hence.
And so I leave thee to thy fortune's lot,
Wishing good luck unto thy wandering steps. 
Achates, 'tis my mother that is fled;
I know her by the movings of her feet.
Stay, gentle Venus! fly not from thy son!
Too cruel, why wilt thou forsake me thus,
Or in these shades deceiv'st mine eyes so oft?
Why talk we not together hand in hand,
And tell our griefs in more familiar terms?
But thou art gone and leav'st me here alone
To dull the air with my discoursive moan. 
Follow, ye Trojans, follow this brave Lord,
And plain to him the sum of your distress.
Why, what are you, or wherefore do you sue?
Wretches of Troy, envied of all the winds,
That crave such favor at your honor's feet,
As poor distressed misery may plead.
Save, save, O save our ships from cruel fire,
That do complain the wounds of thousand waves,
And spare our lives whom every spite pursues.
We come not, we, to wrong your Libyan Gods,
Or steal your household Lares from their shrines;
Our hands are not prepared to lawless spoil,
Nor armed to offend in any kind.
Such force is far from our unweaponed thoughts,
Whose fading weal, of victory forsook,
Forbids all hope to harbor near our hearts.
But tell me, Trojans, Trojans if you be,
Unto what fruitful quarters were ye bound,
Before that Boreas buckled with your sails?
There is a place, Hesperia termed by us,
An ancient Empire, famoused for arms,
And fertile in fair Ceres' furrowed wealth,
Which now we call Italia, of his name
That in such peace long time did rule the same.
When suddenly gloomy Orion rose
And led our ships into the shallow sands,
Whereas the Southern wind with brackish breath
Dispersed them all amongst the wrackful Rocks.
From thence a few of us escaped to land;
The rest, we fear, are folded in the floods.
Brave men-at-arms, abandon fruitless fears,
Since Carthage knows to entertain distress.
Ay, but the barbarous sort do threat our ships
And will not let us lodge upon the sands.
In multitudes they swarm unto the shore
And from the first earth interdict our feet.
Myself will see they shall not trouble ye.
Your men and you shall banquet in our Court,
And every Trojan be as welcome here
As Jupiter to silly Baucis' house.
Come in with me. I'll bring you to my Queen,
Who shall confirm my words with further deeds.
Thanks, gentle Lord, for such unlooked for grace.
Might we but once more see Aeneas' face,
Then would we hope to quite such friendly turns
As shall surpass the wonder of our speech.
Where am I now? these should be Carthage walls.
Why stands my sweet Aeneas thus amazed?
O my Achates, Theban Niobe,
Who for her sons' death wept out life and breath
And, dry with grief, was turned into a stone,
Had not such passions in her head as I.
Methinks that town there should be Troy, yon Ida's hill,
There Xanthus' stream, because here's Priamus;
And when I know it is not, then I die.
And in this humor is Achates too;
I cannot choose but fall upon my knees
And kiss his hand. O, where is Hecuba?
Here she was wont to sit, but, saving air,
Is nothing here. And what is this but stone?
O, yet this stone doth make Aeneas weep!
And would my prayers (as Pygmalion's did)
Could give it life, that under his conduct
We might sail back to Troy and be revenged
On these hardhearted Grecians which rejoice
That nothing now is left of Priamus.
O, Priamus is left, and this is he!
Come, come aboard; pursue the hateful Greeks.
Achates, though mine eyes say this is stone,
Yet thinks my mind that this is Priamus,
And when my grieved heart sighs and says no,
Then would it leap out to give Priam life.
O, were I not at all, so thou mightst be!
Achates, see! King Priam wags his hand!
He is alive! Troy is not overcome!
Thy mind, Aeneas, that would have it so,
Deludes thy eyesight. Priamus is dead.
Ah, Troy is sacked and Priamus is dead,
And why should poor Aeneas be alive?
Sweet father, leave to weep. This is not he,
For were it Priam, he would smile on me.
Aeneas see; here come the Citizens.
Leave to lament, lest they laugh at our fears.
Lords of this town, or whatsoever style
Belongs unto your name, vouchsafe of ruth
To tell us who inhabits this fair town,
What kind of people and who governs them,
For we are strangers driven on this shore
And scarcely know within what Clime we are.
I hear Aeneas' voice, but see him not,
For none of these can be our General.
Like Ilioneus speaks this Nobleman,
But Ilioneus goes not in such robes.
You are Achates, or I deceived.
Aeneas, see Sergestus or his ghost!
He names Aeneas; let us kiss his feet.
It is our Captain! see Ascanius!
Live long Aeneas and Ascanius!
Achates, speak, for I am overjoyed.
O Ilioneus, art thou yet alive?
Blest be the time I see Achates' face.
Why turns Aeneas from his trusty friends?
Sergestus, Ilioneus, and the rest,
Your sight amazed me. O, what destinies
Have brought my sweet companions in such plight?
O tell me, for I long to be resolved.
Lovely Aeneas, these are Carthage walls,
And here Queen Dido wears th' imperial Crown,
Who for Troy's sake hath entertained us all
And clad us in these wealthy robes we wear.
Oft hath she asked us under whom we served,
And when we told her, she would weep for grief,
Thinking the sea had swallowed up thy ships;
And now she sees thee, how will she rejoice!
See where her servitors pass through the hall,
Bearing a banquet. Dido is not far.
Look where she comes! Aeneas, view her well.
Well may I view her, but she sees not me.
What stranger art thou that dost eye me thus?
Sometime I was a Trojan, mighty Queen,
But Troy is not. What shall I say I am?
Renowned Dido, 'tis our General,
{Warlike Aeneas.}
Warlike Aeneas, and in these base robes!
Go fetch the garment which Sichaeus ware.
Brave Prince, welcome to Carthage and to me,
Both happy that Aeneas is our guest.
Sit in this chair and banquet with a Queen.
Aeneas is Aeneas, were he clad
In weeds as bad as ever Irus ware.
This is no seat for one that's comfortless.
May it please your grace to let Aeneas wait,
For though my birth be great, my fortune's mean,
Too mean to be companion to a Queen.
Thy fortune may be greater than thy birth.
Sit down, Aeneas, sit in Dido's place,
And if this be thy son, as I suppose,
Here let him sit. Be merry, lovely child.
This place beseems me not. O, pardon me.
I'll have it so. Aeneas, be content.
Madam, you shall be my mother.
And so I will, sweet child. Be merry man.
Here's to thy better fortune and good stars.
In all humility, I thank your grace.
Remember who thou art. Speak like thyself.
Humility belongs to common grooms.
And who so miserable as Aeneas is?
Lies it in Dido's hands to make thee blest,
Then be assured thou art not miserable.
O Priamus! O Troy! Oh Hecuba!
May I entreat thee to discourse at large,
And truly too, how Troy was overcome,
For many tales go of that City's fall,
And scarcely do agree upon one point.
Some say Antenor did betray the town;
Others report 'twas Sinon's perjury;
But all in this, that Troy is overcome
And Priam dead. Yet how, we hear no news.
A woeful tale bids Dido to unfold,
Whose memory, like pale death's stony mace,
Beats forth my senses from this troubled soul
And makes Aeneas sink at Dido's feet.
What, faints Aeneas to remember Troy,
In whose defense he fought so valiantly?
Then speak, Aeneas, with Achilles' tongue,
And Dido and you Carthaginian Peers
Hear me, but yet with Myrmidons' harsh ears,
Daily inured to broils and Massacres,
Lest you be moved too much with my sad tale.
The Grecian soldiers, tired with ten years' war,
Began to cry, "let us unto our ships,
Troy is invincible. Why stay we here?"
With whose outcries Atrides being appalled,
Summoned the Captains to his princely tent,
Who, looking on the scars we Trojans gave,
Seeing the number of their men decreased
And the remainder weak and out of heart,
Gave up their voices to dislodge the Camp.
And so in troops all marched to Tenedos,
Where when they came, Ulysses on the sand
Assayed with honey words to turn them back.
And as he spoke to further his intent,
The winds did drive huge billows to the shore,
And heaven was darkened with tempestuous clouds.
Then he alleged the Gods would have them stay,
And prophesied Troy should be overcome;
And therewithal he called false Sinon forth,
A man compact of craft and perjury,
Whose ticing tongue was made of Hermes' pipe,
To force an hundred watchful eyes to sleep.
And him, Epeus having made the horse,
With sacrificing wreaths upon his head,
Ulysses sent to our unhappy town,
Who, grovelling in the mire of Xanthus' banks,
His hands bound at his back, and both his eyes
Turned up to heaven, as one resolved to die,
Our Phrygian shepherds haled within the gates
And brought unto the Court of Priamus,
To whom he used action so pitiful,
Looks so remorseful, vows so forcible,
As therewithal the old man, overcome,
Kissed him, embraced him, and unloosed his bands.
Nay, leave not here. Resolve me of the rest.
O, th' enchanting words of that base slave
Made him to think Epeus' pine tree Horse
A sacrifice t'appease Minerva's wrath,
The rather, for that one Laocoon,
Breaking a spear upon his hollow breast,
Was with two winged Serpents stung to death.
Whereat aghast, we were commanded straight
With reverence to draw it into Troy,
In which unhappy work was I employed.
These hands did help to hale it to the gates,
Through which it could not enter, 'twas so huge.
O, had it never entered, Troy had stood!
But Priamus, impatient of delay,
Enforced a wide breach in that rampired wall,
Which thousand battering Rams could never pierce,
And so came in this fatal instrument;
At whose accursed feet, as overjoyed,
We banqueted till, overcome with wine,
Some surfeited and others soundly slept.
Which Sinon viewing, caused the Greekish spies
To haste to Tenedos, and tell the Camp.
Then he unlocked the Horse, and suddenly
From out his entrails Neoptolemus,
Setting his spear upon the ground, leaped forth,
And after him a thousand Grecians more,
In whose stern faces shined the quenchless fire
That after burnt the pride of Asia.
By this, the Camp was come unto the walls,
And through the breach did march into the streets,
Where, meeting with the rest, "kill, kill," they cried.
Frighted with this confused noise, I rose,
And looking from a turret, might behold
Young infants swimming in their parents' blood,
Headless carcasses piled up in heaps,
Virgins half-dead, dragged by their golden hair
And with main force flung on a ring of pikes,
Old men with swords thrust through their aged sides,
Kneeling for mercy to a Greekish lad,
Who with steel Poleaxes dashed out their brains.
Then buckled I mine armor, drew my sword,
And thinking to go down, came Hector's ghost,
With ashy visage, bluish sulphur eyes,
His arms torn from his shoulders, and his breast
Furrowed with wounds, and, that which made me weep,
Thongs at his heels, by which Achilles' horse
Drew him in triumph through the Greekish camp,
Burst from the earth, crying "Aeneas, fly!
Troy is afire! the Grecians have the town!"
O Hector, who weeps not to hear thy name?
Yet flung I forth, and, desperate of my life,
Ran in the thickest throngs, and with this sword
Sent many of their savage ghosts to hell.
At last came Pyrrhus, fell and full of ire,
His harness dropping blood, and on his spear
The mangled head of Priam's youngest son,
And after him his band of Myrmidons,
With balls of wild fire in their murdering paws,
Which made the funeral flame that burnt fair Troy
All which hemmed me about, crying, "this is he."
Ah, how could poor Aeneas scape their hands?
My mother, Venus, jealous of my health,
Conveyed me from their crooked nets and bands.
So I escaped the furious Pyrrhus' wrath,
Who then ran to the palace of the King,
And at Jove's Altar finding Priamus,
About whose withered neck hung Hecuba,
Folding his hand in hers, and jointly both
Beating their breasts and falling on the ground,
He, with his falchion's point raised up at once,
And with Megaera's eyes, stared in their face,
Threat'ning a thousand deaths at every glance.
To whom the aged King thus, trembling, spoke:
"Achilles' son, remember what I was,
Father of fifty sons, but they are slain;
Lord of my fortune, but my fortune's turned;
King of this City, but my Troy is fired;
And now am neither father, Lord, nor King.
Yet who so wretched but desires to live?
O, let me live, great Neoptolemus!"
Not moved at all, but smiling at his tears,
This butcher, whilst his hands were yet held up,
Treading upon his breast, struck off his hands.
O end, Aeneas! I can hear no more.
At which the frantic Queen leaped on his face,
And in his eyelids hanging by the nails,
A little while prolonged her husband's life.
At last the soldiers pulled her by the heels
And swung her howling in the empty air,
Which sent an echo to the wounded King,
Whereat he lifted up his bedrid limbs,
And would have grappled with Achilles' son,
Forgetting both his want of strength and hands,
Which he disdaining, whisked his sword about,
And with the wind thereof the King fell down.
Then from the navel to the throat at once
He ripped old Priam, at whose latter gasp
Jove's marble statue 'gan to bend the brow,
As loathing Pyrrhus for this wicked act.
Yet he, undaunted, took his father's flag
And dipped it in the old King's chill cold blood,
And then in triumph ran into the streets,
Through which he could not pass for slaughtered men.
So, leaning on his sword, he stood stone still,
Viewing the fire wherewith rich Ilion burned.
By this, I got my father on my back,
This young boy in mine arms, and by the hand
Led fair Creusa, my beloved wife.
When thou, Achates, with thy sword mad'st way,
And we were round environed with the Greeks,
O there I lost my wife, and had not we
Fought manfully, I had not told this tale.
Yet manhood would not serve. Of force we fled,
And as we went unto our ships, thou knowest
We saw Cassandra sprawling in the streets,
Whom Ajax ravished in Diana's Fane,
Her cheeks swollen with sighs, her hair all rent,
Whom I took up to bear unto our ships.
But suddenly the Grecians followed us,
And I, alas, was forced to let her lie.
Then got we to our ships, and being aboard,
Polyxena cried out, "Aeneas, stay!
The Greeks pursue me. Stay and take me in!"
Moved with her voice, I leaped into the sea,
Thinking to bear her on my back aboard,
For all our ships were launched into the deep,
And as I swum, she, standing on the shore,
Was by the cruel Myrmidons surprised
And after by that Pyrrhus sacrificed.
I die with melting ruth. Aeneas, leave.
O, what became of aged Hecuba?
How got Aeneas to the fleet again?
But how scaped Helen, she that caused this war?
Achates, speak. Sorrow hath tired me quite.
What happened to the Queen we cannot show.
We hear they led her captive into Greece.
As for Aeneas, he swam quickly back,
And Helena betrayed Deiphobus,
Her Lover, after Alexander died,
And so was reconciled to Menelaus.
O, had that ticing strumpet ne'er been born!
Trojan, thy ruthful tale hath made me sad.
Come, let us think upon some pleasing sport
To rid me from these melancholy thoughts.
Fair child, stay thou with Dido's waiting maid.
I'll give thee Sugar almonds, sweet Conserves,
A silver girdle, and a golden purse,
And this young Prince shall be thy playfellow.
Are you Queen Dido's son?
Ay, and my mother gave me this fine bow.
Shall I have such a quiver and a bow?
Such bow, such quiver, and such golden shafts
Will Dido give to sweet Ascanius.
For Dido's sake I take thee in my arms
And stick these spangled feathers in thy hat.
Eat Comfits in mine arms and I will sing.
Now is he fast asleep, and in this grove
Amongst Green brakes I'll lay Ascanius
And strew him with sweet smelling Violets,
Blushing Roses, purple Hyacinth.
These milk-white Doves shall be his Centronels,
Who, if that any seek to do him hurt,
Will quickly fly to Cytherea's fist.
Now, Cupid, turn thee to Ascanius' shape
And go to Dido, who, in stead of him,
Will set thee on her lap and play with thee.
Then touch her white breast with this arrow head,
That she may dote upon Aeneas' love,
And by that means repair his broken ships,
Victual his Soldiers, give him wealthy gifts,
And he at last depart to Italy,
Or else in Carthage make his kingly throne.
I will, fair mother, and so play my part
As every touch shall wound Queen Dido's heart.
Sleep, my sweet nephew, in these cooling shades,
Free from the murmur of these running streams,
The cry of beasts, the rattling of the winds,
Or whisking of these leaves. All shall be still
And nothing interrupt thy quiet sleep,
Till I return and take thee hence again. 
Now, Cupid, cause the Carthaginian queen
To be enamored of thy brother's looks.
Convey this golden arrow in thy sleeve,
Lest she imagine thou art Venus' son,
And when she strokes thee softly on the head,
Then shall I touch her breast and conquer her.
How long, fair Dido, shall I pine for thee?
'tis not enough that thou dost grant me love,
But that I may enjoy what I desire.
That love is childish which consists in words.
Iarbas, know that thou of all my wooers
(And yet have I had many mightier Kings)
Hast had the greatest favors I could give.
I fear me, Dido hath been counted light
In being too familiar with Iarbas,
Albeit the Gods do know no wanton thought
Had ever residence in Dido's breast.
But Dido is the favor I request.
Fear not, Iarbas; Dido may be thine.
Look, sister, how Aeneas' little son
Plays with your garments and embraceth you.
No, Dido will not take me in her arms;
I shall not be her son, she loves me not.
Weep not, sweet boy; thou shalt be Dido's son.
Sit in my lap, and let me hear thee sing.
No more, my child. Now talk another while,
And tell me where learned'st thou this pretty song.
My cousin Helen taught it me in Troy.
How lovely is Ascanius when he smiles.
Will Dido let me hang about her neck?
Ay, wag, and give thee leave to kiss her too.
What will you give me now? I'll have this Fan.
Take it, Ascanius, for thy father's sake.
Come, Dido, leave Ascanius. Let us walk.
Go thou away. Ascanius shall stay.
Ungentle Queen, is this thy love to me?
O stay, Iarbas, and I'll go with thee.
And if my mother go, I'll follow her.
Why stay'st thou here? thou art no love of mine.
Iarbas die, seeing she abandons thee.
No, live Iarbas. What hast thou deserved,
That I should say thou art no love of mine?
Something thou hast deserved. Away, I say!
Depart from Carthage. Come not in my sight.
Am I not King of rich Getulia?
Iarbas, pardon me and stay a while.
What tell'st thou me of rich Getulia?
Am not I Queen of Libya? then depart.
I go to feed the humor of my Love,
Yet not from Carthage for a thousand worlds.
No; but I charge thee never look on me.
Then pull out both mine eyes, or let me die.
Wherefore doth Dido bid Iarbas go?
Because his loathsome sight offends mine eye,
And in my thoughts is shrined another love.
O Anna, didst thou know how sweet love were,
Full soon wouldst thou abjure this single life.
Poor soul, I know too well the sour of love.
O, that Iarbas could but fancy me!
Is not Aeneas fair and beautiful?
Yes, and Iarbas foul and favorless.
Is he not eloquent in all his speech?
Yes, and Iarbas rude and rustical.
Name not Iarbas. But sweet Anna, say,
Is not Aeneas worthy Dido's love?
O sister, were you Empress of the world,
Aeneas well deserves to be your love.
So lovely is he that where'er he goes
The people swarm to gaze him in the face.
But tell them none shall gaze on him but I,
Lest their gross eyebeams taint my lover's cheeks.
Anna, good sister Anna, go for him,
Lest with these sweet thoughts I melt clean away.
Then, sister, you'll abjure Iarbas' love?
Yet must I hear that loathsome name again?
Run for Aeneas, or I'll fly to him. 
You shall not hurt my father when he comes.
No; for thy sake I'll love thy father well.
O dull conceited Dido, that till now
Didst never think Aeneas beautiful!
But now, for quittance of this oversight,
I'll make me bracelets of his golden hair;
His glistering eyes shall be my looking glass,
His lips an altar, where I'll offer up
As many kisses as the Sea hath sands.
Instead of music I will hear him speak.
His looks shall be my only Library,
And thou, Aeneas, Dido's treasury,
In whose fair bosom I will lock more wealth
Than twenty thousand indias can afford.
O, here he comes! love, love, give Dido leave
To be more modest than her thoughts admit,
Lest I be made a wonder to the world.
Achates, how doth Carthage please your Lord?
That will Aeneas show your majesty.
I understand your highness sent for me.
No, but now thou art here, tell me, in sooth
In what might Dido highly pleasure thee.
So much have I received at Dido's hands,
As, without blushing, I can ask no more.
Yet, Queen of Afric, are my ships unrigged,
My Sails all rent in sunder with the wind,
My Oars broken, and my Tackling lost,
Yea, all my Navy split with Rocks and Shelves;
Nor Stern nor Anchor have our maimed Fleet;
Our Masts the furious winds struck overboard;
Which piteous wants if Dido will supply,
We will account her author of our lives.
Aeneas, I'll repair thy Trojan ships,
Conditionally that thou wilt stay with me
And let Achates sail to Italy.
I'll give thee tackling made of rivelled gold,
Wound on the barks of odoriferous trees,
Oars of massy Ivory, full of holes
Through which the water shall delight to play.
Thy Anchors shall be hewed from Crystal Rocks
Which, if thou lose, shall shine above the waves;
The Masts whereon thy swelling sails shall hang,
Hollow Pyramides of silver plate;
The sails of folded Lawn, where shall be wrought
The wars of Troy, but not Troy's overthrow.
For ballast, empty Dido's treasury.
Take what ye will, but leave Aeneas here.
Achates, thou shalt be so meanly clad
As Sea-borne Nymphs shall swarm about thy ships
And wanton Mermaids court thee with sweet songs,
Flinging in favors of more sovereign worth
Than Thetis hangs about Apollo's neck,
So that Aeneas may but stay with me.
Wherefore would Dido have Aeneas stay?
To war against my bordering enemies.
Aeneas, think not Dido is in love,
For if that any man could conquer me,
I had been wedded ere Aeneas came.
See where the pictures of my suitors hang;
And are not these as fair as fair may be?
I saw this man at Troy, ere Troy was sacked.
I this in Greece when Paris stole fair Helen.
This man and I were at Olympus' games.
I know this face. He is a Persian born.
I traveled with him to Aetolia.
And I in athens with this gentleman,
Unless I be deceived, disputed once.
But speak, Aeneas; know you none of these?
No, Madam, but it seems that these are Kings.
All these and others which I never saw
Have been most urgent suitors for my love.
Some came in person; others sent their Legates;
Yet none obtained me; I am free from all,
And yet, God knows, entangled unto one.
This was an Orator and thought by words
To compass me, but yet he was deceived;
And this a Spartan Courtier, vain and wild,
But his fantastic humors pleased not me.
This was Alcion, a Musician,
But played he ne'er so sweet, I let him go.
This was the wealthy King of Thessaly,
But I had gold enough and cast him off;
This Meleager's son, a warlike Prince,
But weapons 'gree not with my tender years.
The rest are such as all the world well knows,
Yet now I swear, by heaven and him I love,
I was as far from love as they from hate.
O, happy shall he be whom Dido loves.
Then never say that thou art miserable,
Because it may be thou shalt be my love.
Yet boast not of it, for I love thee not.
And yet I hate thee not. O, if I speak,
I shall betray myself. Aeneas speak.
We two will go ahunting in the woods,
But not so much for thee - thou art but one -
As for Achates and his followers. 
Here lies my hate, Aeneas' cursed brat,
The boy wherein false destiny delights,
The heir of fury, the favorite of the fates,
That ugly imp that shall outwear my wrath
And wrong my deity with high disgrace.
But I will take another order now
And raze th' eternal Register of time.
Troy shall no more call him her second hope,
Nor Venus triumph in his tender youth,
For here, in spite of heaven, I'll murder him
And feed infection with his let out life.
Say, Paris, now shall Venus have the ball?
Say, vengeance, now shall her Ascanius die?
O, no! God wot, I cannot watch my time,
Nor quit good turns with double fee down told.
Tut, I am simple, without mind to hurt,
And have no gall at all to grieve my foe,
But lustful Jove and his adulterous child
Shall find it written on confusion's front,
That only Juno rules in Rhamnus' town.
What should this mean? my Doves are back returned,
Who warn me of such danger prest at hand
To harm my sweet Ascanius' lovely life.
Juno, my mortal foe, what make you here?
Avaunt, old witch, and trouble not my wits.
Fie, Venus, that such causeless words of wrath
Should e'er defile so fair a mouth as thine.
Are not we both sprung of celestial race
And banquet as two Sisters with the Gods?
Why is it then displeasure should disjoin
Whom kindred and acquaintance counites?
Out, hateful hag! thou wouldst have slain my son,
Had not my Doves discovered thy intent.
But I will tear thy eyes from forth thy head
And feast the birds with their bloodshotten balls,
If thou but lay thy fingers on my boy.
Is this then all the thanks that I shall have
For saving him from Snakes' and Serpents' stings
That would have killed him, sleeping as he lay?
What though I was offended with thy son,
And wrought him mickle woe on sea and land,
When, for the hate of Trojan Ganymede,
That was advanced by my Hebe's shame,
And Paris' judgment of the heavenly ball,
I mustered all the winds unto his wrack
And urged each Element to his annoy.
Yet now I do repent me of his ruth
And wish that I had never wronged him so.
Bootless, I saw, it was to war with fate
That hath so many unresisted friends,
Wherefore I changed my counsel with the time
And planted love where envy erst had sprung.
Sister of Jove, if that thy love be such
As these protestations do paint forth,
We two as friends one fortune will divide.
Cupid shall lay his arrows in thy lap
And to a Scepter change his golden shafts;
Fancy and modesty shall live as mates
And thy fair peacocks by my pigeons perch.
Love my Aeneas, and desire is thine;
The day, the night, my Swans, my sweets, are thine.
More than melodious are these words to me,
That overcloy my soul with their content.
Venus, sweet Venus, how may I deserve
Such amorous favors at thy beauteous hand?
But that thou mayst more easily perceive
How highly I do prize this amity,
Hark to a motion of eternal league,
Which I will make in quittance of thy love.
Thy son, thou know'st, with Dido now remains
And feeds his eyes with favors of her Court;
She likewise in admiring spends her time
And cannot talk nor think of aught but him.
Why should not they then join in marriage
And bring forth mighty Kings to Carthage town,
Whom casualty of sea hath made such friends?
And, Venus, let there be a match confirmed
Betwixt these two whose loves are so alike,
And both our Deities, conjoined in one,
Shall chain felicity unto their throne.
Well could I like this reconcilement's means,
But much I fear my son will ne'er consent,
Whose armed soul, already on the sea,
Darts forth her light to Lavinia's shore.
Fair queen of love, I will divorce these doubts
And find the way to weary such fond thoughts.
This day they both ahunting forth will ride
Into these woods adjoining to these walls,
When in the midst of all their gamesome sports,
I'll make the Clouds dissolve their wat'ry works
And drench Silvanus' dwellings with their showers.
Then in one Cave the Queen and he shall meet
And interchangeably discourse their thoughts,
Whose short conclusion will seal up their hearts
Unto the purpose which we now propound.
Sister, I see you savor of my wiles.
Be it as you will have it for this once.
Meantime Ascanius shall be my charge,
Whom I will bear to Ida in mine arms,
And couch him in Adonis' purple down. 
Aeneas, think not but I honor thee
That thus in person go with thee to hunt.
My princely robes, thou seest, are laid aside,
Whose glittering pomp Diana's shroud supplies,
All fellows now, disposed alike to sport.
The woods are wide, and we have store of game.
Fair Trojan, hold my golden bow a while
Until I gird my quiver to my side.
Lords, go before. We two must talk alone.
Ungentle, can she wrong Iarbas so?
I'll die before a stranger have that grace.
"We two will talk alone" - what words be these?
What makes Iarbas here of all the rest?
We could have gone without your company.
But love and duty led him on perhaps,
To press beyond acceptance to your sight.
Why, man of Troy, do I offend thine eyes?
Or art thou grieved thy betters press so nigh?
How now, Getulian, are ye grown so brave
To challenge us with your comparisons?
Peasant, go seek companions like thyself,
And meddle not with any that I love.
Aeneas, be not moved at what he says,
For otherwhile he will be out of joint.
Women may wrong by privilege of love,
But should that man of men, (Dido except)
Have taunted me in these opprobrious terms,
I would have either drunk his dying blood,
Or else I would have given my life in gage.
Huntsmen, why pitch you not your toils apace
And rouse the lightfoot Deer from forth their lair?
Sister, see. See Ascanius in his pomp,
Bearing his hunt spear bravely in his hand.
Yea, little son, are you so forward now?
Ay, mother, I shall one day be a man,
And better able unto other arms;
Meantime these wanton weapons serve my war,
Which I will break betwixt a Lion's jaws.
What! dar'st thou look a Lion in the face?
Ay, and outface him too, do what he can.
How like his father speaketh he in all.
And might I live to see him sack rich Thebes
And load his spear with Grecian Princes' heads,
Then would I wish me with Anchises' Tomb
And dead to honor that hath brought me up.
And might I live to see thee shipped away
And hoist aloft on Neptune's hideous hills,
Then would I wish me in fair Dido's arms
And dead to scorn that hath pursued me so.
Stout friend, Achates, dost thou know this wood?
As I remember, here you shot the Deer
That saved your famished soldiers' lives from death,
When first you set your foot upon the shore,
And here we met fair Venus, virginlike,
Bearing her bow and quiver at her back.
O, how these irksome labors now delight
And overjoy my thoughts with their escape.
Who would not undergo all kind of toil
To be well stored with such a winter's tale?
Aeneas, leave these dumps and let's away
Some to the mountains, some unto the soil,
You to the valleys, - thou unto the house.
Ay, this it is which wounds me to the death,
To see a Phrygian, far fet o' the sea,
Preferred before a man of majesty.
O love! O hate! O cruel women's hearts,
That imitate the Moon in every change
And like the Planets ever love to range.
What shall I do, thus wronged with disdain?
Revenge me on Aeneas or on her?
On her? fond man, that were to war 'gainst heaven
And with one shaft provoke ten thousand darts.
This Trojan's end will be thy envy's aim,
Whose blood will reconcile thee to content
And make love drunken with thy sweet desire.
But Dido, that now holdeth him so dear,
Will die with very tidings of his death.
But time will discontinue her content
And mold her mind unto new fancy's shapes.
O God of heaven, turn the hand of fate
Unto that happy day of my delight!
And then - what then? Iarbas shall but love.
So doth he now, though not with equal gain.
That resteth in the rival of thy pain,
Who ne'er will cease to soar till he be slain. 
Tell me, dear love, how found you out this Cave?
By chance, sweet Queen, as Mars and Venus met.
Why, that was in a net, where we are loose.
And yet I am not free. Oh, would I were!
Why, what is it that Dido may desire
And not obtain, be it in human power?
The thing that I will die before I ask,
And yet desire to have before I die.
It is not aught Aeneas may achieve?
Aeneas? no, although his eyes do pierce.
What, hath Iarbas angered her in aught,
And will she be avenged on his life?
Not angered me, except in angering thee.
Who, then, of all so cruel may he be
That should detain thy eye in his defects?
The man that I do eye where'er I am,
Whose amorous face, like Paean, sparkles fire,
Whenas he butts his beams on Flora's bed.
Prometheus hath put on Cupid's shape,
And I must perish in his burning arms.
Aeneas, O Aeneas, quench these flames.
What ails my Queen? is she fall'n sick of late?
Not sick, my love; but sick I must conceal
The torment that it boots me not reveal.
And yet I'll speak. And yet I'll hold my peace.
Do shame her worst, I will disclose my grief.
Aeneas, thou art he. What did I say?
Something it was that now I have forgot.
What means fair Dido by this doubtful speech?
Nay, nothing. But Aeneas loves me not.
Aeneas' thoughts dare not ascend so high
As Dido's heart, which Monarchs might not scale.
It was because I saw no King like thee,
Whose golden Crown might balance my content.
But now that I have found what to affect,
I follow one that loveth fame 'fore me,
And rather had seem fair to Sirens' eyes
Than to the Carthage Queen that dies for him.
If that your majesty can look so low
As my despised worths that shun all praise,
With this my hand I give to you my heart
And vow by all the Gods of Hospitality,
By heaven and earth, and my fair brother's bow,
By Paphos, Capys, and the purple Sea
From whence my radiant mother did descend,
And by this Sword that saved me from the Greeks,
Never to leave these new-upreared walls,
While Dido lives and rules in Juno's town,
Never to like or love any but her.
What more than Delian music do I hear,
That calls my soul from forth his living seat
To move unto the measures of delight!
Kind clouds that sent forth such a courteous storm
As made disdain to fly to fancy's lap!
Stout love, in mine arms make thy Italy,
Whose Crown and kingdom rests at thy command.
Sichaeus, not Aeneas be thou called.
The King of Carthage, not Anchises' son.
Hold. take these Jewels at thy Lover's hand,
These golden bracelets, and this wedding ring
Wherewith my husband wooed me yet a maid,
And be thou king of Libya by my gift.
Did ever men see such a sudden storm,
Or day so clear so suddenly o'ercast?
I think some fell enchantress dwelleth here,
That can call them forth whenas she please
And dive into black tempest's treasury
Whenas she means to mask the world with clouds.
In all my life I never knew the like.
It hailed; it snowed; it lightninged all at once.
I think it was the devil's reveling night.
There was such hurly-burly in the heavens.
Doubtless Apollo's Axletree is cracked,
Or aged Atlas' shoulder out of joint,
The motion was so overviolent.
In all this coil, where have ye left the Queen?
Nay, where's my warlike father, can you tell?
Behold where both of them come forth the Cave.
Come forth the cave? can heaven endure this sight?
Iarbas, curse that unrevenging Jove,
Whose flinty darts slept in Typhoeus' den,
While these adulterers surfeited with sin.
Nature, why mad'st me not some poisonous beast,
That with the sharpness of my edged sting
I might have staked them both unto the earth,
Whilst they were sporting in this darksome Cave?
The air is clear and Southern winds are whist.
Come, Dido, let us hasten to the town,
Since gloomy Aeolus doth cease to frown.
Achates and Ascanius, well met.
Fair Anna, how escaped you from the shower?
As others did, by running to the wood.
But where were you, Iarbas, all this while?
Not with Aeneas in the ugly Cave.
I see Aeneas sticketh in your mind,
But I will soon put by that stumbling block
And quell those hopes that thus employ your cares.
Come, servants, come; bring forth the Sacrifice,
That I may pacify that gloomy Jove,
Whose empty Altars have enlarged our ills.
Eternal Jove, great master of the Clouds,
Father of gladness and all frolic thoughts,
That with thy gloomy hand corrects the heaven
When airy creatures war amongst themselves,
Hear, hear, O hear Iarbas' plaining prayers,
Whose hideous echoes make the welkin howl
And all the woods Eliza to resound!
The woman that thou willed us entertain,
Where, straying in our borders up and down,
She craved a hide of ground to build a town,
With whom we did divide both laws and land,
And all the fruits that plenty else sends forth,
Scorning our loves and royal marriage rites,
Yields up her beauty to a stranger's bed,
Who, having wrought her shame, is straightway fled.
Now, if thou beest a pitying God of power,
On whom ruth and compassion ever waits,
Redress these wrongs and warn him to his ships,
That now afflicts me with his flattering eyes.
How now, Iarbas! at your prayers so hard?
Ay, Anna. Is there aught you would with me?
Nay, no such weighty business of import
But may be slacked until another time.
Yet, if you would partake with me the cause
Of this devotion that detaineth you,
I would be thankful for such courtesy.
Anna, against this Trojan do I pray,
Who seeks to rob me of thy Sister's love
And dive into her heart by colored looks.
Alas, poor King, that labors so in vain
For her that so delighteth in thy pain.
Be ruled by me and seek some other love,
Whose yielding heart may yield thee more relief.
Mine eye is fixed where fancy cannot start.
O leave me, leave me to my silent thoughts
That register the numbers of my ruth,
And I will either move the thoughtless flint
Or drop out both mine eyes in drizzling tears,
Before my sorrow's tide have any stint.
I will not leave Iarbas, whom I love,
In this delight of dying pensiveness.
Away with Dido! Anna be thy song,
Anna, that doth admire thee more than heaven.
I may nor will list to such loathsome change
That intercepts the course of my desire.
Servants, come fetch these empty vessels here,
For I will fly from these alluring eyes
That do pursue my peace where'er it goes. 
Iarbas, stay! loving Iarbas, stay,
For I have honey to present thee with.
Hardhearted, wilt not deign to hear me speak?
I'll follow thee with outcries ne'ertheless
And strew thy walks with my dishevelled hair. 
Carthage, my friendly host, adieu,
Since destiny doth call me from thy shore.
Hermes this night, descending in a dream,
Hath summoned me to fruitful Italy.
Jove wills it so. My mother wills it so.
Let my Phoenissa grant, and then I go.
Grant she or no, Aeneas must away,
Whose golden fortunes, clogged with courtly ease,
Cannot ascend to Fame's immortal house
Or banquet in bright honor's burnished hall,
Till he hath furrowed Neptune's glassy fields
And cut a passage through his topless hills.
Achates, come forth! Sergestus, Ilioneus,
Cloanthus, haste away! Aeneas calls.
What wills our Lord, or wherefore did he call?
The dreams, (brave mates) that did beset my bed,
When sleep but newly had embraced the night,
Commands me leave these unrenowned realms,
Whereas Nobility abhors to stay,
And none but base Aeneas will abide.
Aboard, aboard, since Fates do bid aboard,
And slice the Sea with sable colored ships,
On whom the nimble winds may all day wait,
And follow them, as footmen, through the deep.
Yet Dido casts her eyes like anchors out,
To stay my Fleet from loosing forth the Bay.
"Come back, come back," I hear her cry afar,
"And let me link thy body to my lips,
That, tied together by the striving tongues,
We may as one sail into Italy."
Banish that ticing dame from forth your mouth,
And follow your foreseeing stars in all.
This is no life for men-at-arms to live,
Where dalliance doth consume a Soldier's strength,
And wanton motions of alluring eyes
Effeminate our minds, inured to war.
Why, let us build a City of our own,
And not stand lingering here for amorous looks.
Will Dido raise old Priam forth his grave
And build the town again the Greeks did burn?
No, no; she cares not how we sink or swim,
So she may have Aeneas in her arms.
To Italy, sweet friends, to Italy!
We will not stay a minute longer here.
Trojans aboard, and I will follow you.
I fain would go, yet beauty calls me back.
To leave her so and not once say farewell
Were to transgress against all laws of love,
But if I use such ceremonious thanks
As parting friends accustom on the shore,
Her silver arms will coil me round about
And tears of pearl cry, "stay, Aeneas, stay."
Each word she says will then contain a Crown,
And every speech be ended with a kiss.
I may not 'dure this female drudgery.
To sea, Aeneas! find out Italy!
O, Anna, run unto the waterside.
They say Aeneas' men are going aboard;
It may be he will steal away with them.
Stay not to answer me. Run, Anna, run.
O foolish Trojans that would steal from hence
And not let Dido understand their drift.
I would have given Achates store of gold
And Ilioneus gum and Libyan spice,
The common soldiers rich embroidered coats
And silver whistles to control the winds,
Which Circes sent Sichaeus when he lived.
Unworthy are they of a Queen's reward.
See where they come. How might I do to chide?
'Twas time to run. Aeneas had been gone;
The sails were hoisting up and he aboard.
O princely Dido, give me leave to speak.
I went to take my farewell of Achates.
How haps Achates bid me not farewell?
Because I feared your grace would keep me here.
To rid thee of that doubt, aboard again.
I charge thee put to sea, and stay not here.
Then let Aeneas go aboard with us.
Get you aboard. Aeneas means to stay.
The sea is rough. The winds blow to the shore.
O false Aeneas! now the sea is rough,
But when you were aboard, 'twas calm enough.
Thou and Achates meant to sail away.
Hath not the Carthage Queen mine only son?
Thinks Dido I will go and leave him here?
Aeneas pardon me, for I forgot
That young Ascanius lay with me this night.
Love made me jealous. But, to make amends,
Wear the imperial Crown of Libya.
Sway thou the Punic Scepter in my stead,
And punish me, Aeneas, for this crime.
This kiss shall be fair Dido's punishment.
O, how a Crown becomes Aeneas' head.
Stay here, Aeneas, and command as King.
How vain am I to wear this Diadem
And bear this golden Scepter in my hand.
A burgonet of steel and not a Crown,
A sword and not a Scepter fits Aeneas.
O keep them still, and let me gaze my fill.
Now looks Aeneas like immortal Jove.
O where is Ganymede to hold his cup
And Mercury to fly for what he calls?
Ten thousand Cupids hover in the air
And fan it in Aeneas' lovely face.
O that the Clouds were here, wherein thou fleest,
That thou and I unseen might sport ourselves.
Heaven, envious of our joys, is waxen pale,
And when we whisper, then the stars fall down
To be partakers of our honey talk.
O Dido, patroness of all our lives,
When I leave thee, death be my punishment.
Swell,raging seas. Frown, wayward destinies.
Blow winds. Threaten ye Rocks and sandy shelves.
This is the harbor that Aeneas seeks.
Let's see what tempests can annoy me now.
Not all the world can take thee from mine arms.
Aeneas may command as many Moors
As in the Sea are little water drops.
And now, to make experience of my love,
Fair sister Anna, lead my lover forth
And, seated on my Jennet, let him ride
As Dido's husband through the Punic streets,
And will my guard with Mauritanian darts
To wait upon him as their sovereign Lord.
What if the Citizens repine thereat?
Those that dislike what Dido gives in charge,
Command my guard to slay for their offense.
Shall vulgar peasants storm at what I do?
The ground is mine that gives them sustenance,
The air wherein they breathe, the water, fire,
All that they have, their lands, their goods, their lives;
And I, the Goddess of all these, command
Aeneas ride as Carthaginian King.
Aeneas, for his parentage, deserves
As large a kingdom as is Libya.
Ay, and unless the destinies be false,
I shall be planted in as rich a land.
Speak of no other land. This land is thine.
Dido is thine; henceforth I'll call thee Lord.
Do as I bid thee, Sister. Lead the way.
And from a turret I'll behold my love.
Then here in me shall flourish Priam's race,
And thou and I, Achates, for revenge
For Troy, for Priam, for his fifty sons,
Our kinsmen's lives, and thousand guiltless souls,
Will lead an host against the hateful Greeks
And fire proud Lacedaemon o'er their heads. 
Speaks not Aeneas like a Conqueror?
O blessed tempests that did drive him in!
O happy sand that made him run aground!
Henceforth you shall be our Carthage Gods.
Ay, but it may be he will leave my love
And seek a foreign land called Italy.
O that I had a charm to keep the winds
Within the closure of a golden ball,
Or that the Tyrrhene sea were in mine arms,
That he might suffer shipwrack on my breast
As oft as he attempts to hoist up sail.
I must prevent him. Wishing will not serve.
Go, bid my Nurse take young Ascanius
And bear him in the country to her house.
Aeneas will not go without his son.
Yet, lest he should, for I am full of fear,
Bring me his oars, his tackling, and his sails.
What if I sink his ships? O, he'll frown.
Better he frown than I should die for grief.
I cannot see him frown; it may not be.
Armies of foes resolved to win this town,
Or impious traitors vowed to have my life,
Affright me not; only Aeneas' frown
Is that which terrifies poor Dido's heart.
Not bloody spears, appearing in the air,
Presage the downfall of my empery,
Nor blazing Comets threaten Dido's death;
It is Aeneas' frown that ends my days.
If he forsake me not, I never die,
For in his looks I see eternity,
And he'll make me immortal with a kiss.
Your nurse is gone with young Ascanius,
And here's Aeneas' tackling, oars, and sails.
Are these the sails that, in despite of me,
Packed with the winds to bear Aeneas hence?
I'll hang ye in the chamber where I lie;
Drive if you can my house to Italy.
I'll set the casement open, that the winds
May enter in and once again conspire
Against the life of me, poor Carthage Queen.
But though ye go he stays in Carthage still;
And let rich Carthage fleet upon the seas,
So I may have Aeneas in mine arms.
Is this the wood that grew in Carthage plains,
And would be toiling in the wat'ry billows
To rob their mistress of her Trojan guest?
O cursed tree, hadst thou but wit or sense
To measure how I prize Aeneas' love,
Thou wouldst have leaped from out the Sailors' hands.
And told me that Aeneas meant to go.
And yet I blame thee not; thou art but wood.
The water, which our Poets term a Nymph,
Why did it suffer thee to touch her breast
And shrunk not back, knowing my love was there?
The water is an Element, no Nymph.
Why should I blame Aeneas for his flight?
O Dido, blame not him, but break his oars.
These were the instruments that launched him forth.
There's not so much as this base tackling too,
But dares to heap up sorrow to my heart.
Was it not you that hoisted up these sails?
Why burst you not, and they fell in the seas?
For this will Dido tie ye full of knots
And shear ye all asunder with her hands.
Now serve to chastise shipboys for their faults;
Ye shall no more offend the Carthage Queen.
Now let him hang my favors on his masts
And see if those will serve instead of sails.
For tackling, let him take the chains of gold
Which I bestowed upon his followers.
Instead of oars, let him use his hands
And swim to Italy. I'll keep these sure.
My Lord Ascanius, ye must go with me.
Whither must I go? I'll stay with my mother.
No, thou shalt go with me unto my house.
I have an Orchard that hath store of plums,
Brown Almonds, Cerises, ripe Figs, and Dates,
Dewberries, Apples, yellow Oranges,
A garden where are Beehives full of honey,
Musk roses, and a thousand sort of flowers;
And in the midst doth run a silver stream,
Where thou shalt see the red-gilled fishes leap,
White Swans, and many lovely waterfowl.
Now speak, Ascanius, will ye go or no?
Come, come, I'll go. How far hence is your house?
But hereby, child. We shall get thither straight.
Nurse, I am weary; will you carry me?
Ay, so you'll dwell with me and call me mother.
So you'll love me, I care not if I do.
That I might live to see this boy a man!
How prettily he laughs. Go, you wag!
You'll be a twigger when you come to age.
Say Dido what she will, I am not old.
I'll be no more a widow. I am young;
O, what mean I to have such foolish thoughts!
Foolish is love, a toy. O sacred love!
If there be any heaven in earth, 'tis love,
Especially in women of your years.
Blush, blush for shame! why shouldst thou think of love?
A grave, and not a lover, fits thy age.
A grave? why? I may live a hundred years;
Fourscore is but a girl's age. Love is sweet.
My veins are withered and my sinews dry.
Why do I think of love, now I should die?
Well, if he come a wooing, he shall speed.
O, how unwise was I to say him nay. 
Triumph, my mates; our travels are at end.
Here will Aeneas build a statelier Troy
Than that which grim Atrides overthrew.
Carthage shall vaunt her petty walls no more,
For I will grace them with a fairer frame
And clad her in a Crystal livery
Wherein the day may evermore delight.
From golden India Ganges will I fetch,
Whose wealthy streams may wait upon her towers
And triple wise entrench her round about.
The Sun from Egypt shall rich odors bring,
Wherewith his burning beams, like laboring Bees
That load their thighs with Hybla's honey's spoils,
Shall here unburden their exhaled sweets
And plant our pleasant suburbs with their fumes.
What length or breath shall this brave town contain?
Not past four thousand paces at the most.
But what shall it be called? Troy, as before?
That have I not determined with myself.
Let it be termed aenea, by your name.
Rather Ascania, by your little son.
Nay, I will have it called Anchisaeon,
Aeneas, stay! Jove's Herald bids thee stay.
Whom do I see? Jove's winged messenger?
Welcome to Carthage, new erected town.
Why, cousin, stand you building Cities here
And beautifying the Empire of this Queen,
While Italy is clean out of thy mind?
Too, too forgetful of thine own affairs,
Why wilt thou so betray thy son's good hap?
The king of Gods sent me from highest heaven
To sound this angry message in thine ears:
Vain man, what Monarchy expect'st thou here,
Or with what thought sleep'st thou in Libya shore?
If that all glory hath forsaken thee
And thou despise the praise of such attempts,
Yet think upon Ascanius' prophecy,
And young Iulus' more than thousand years,
Whom I have brought from Ida where he slept,
And bore young Cupid unto Cyprus isle.
This was my mother that beguiled the Queen
And made me take my brother for my son.
No marvel, Dido, though thou be in love,
That daily dandlest Cupid in thy arms.
Welcome, sweet child. Where hast thou been this long?
Eating sweet Comfits with Queen Dido's maid,
Who ever since hath lulled me in her arms.
Sergestus, bear him hence unto our ships,
Lest Dido, spying him, keep him for a pledge.
Spend'st thou thy time about this little boy,
And giv'st not ear unto the charge I bring?
I tell thee thou must straight to Italy,
Or else abide the wrath of frowning Jove.
How should I put into the raging deep,
Who have no sails nor tackling for my ships?
What, would the Gods have me, Deucalion-like,
Float up and down where'er the billows drive?
Though she repaired my fleet and gave me ships,
Yet hath she ta'en away my oars and masts,
And left me neither sail nor stern aboard.
How now, Aeneas sad? what means these dumps?
Iarbas, I am clean besides myself.
Jove hath heaped on me such a desperate charge,
Which neither art nor reason may achieve,
Nor I devise by what means to contrive.
As how, I pray? may I entreat you tell?
With speed he bids me sail to Italy,
Whenas I want both rigging for my fleet
And also furniture for these my men.
If that be all, then cheer thy drooping looks,
For I will furnish thee with such supplies.
Let some of those thy followers go with me,
And they shall have what thing soe'er thou need'st.
Thanks, good Iarbas, for thy friendly aid.
Achates and the rest shall wait on thee,
Whilst I rest thankful for this courtesy.
Now will I haste unto Lavinian shore
And raise a new foundation to old Troy.
Witness the Gods, and witness heaven and earth,
How loath I am to leave these Libyan bounds,
But that eternal Jupiter commands.
I fear I saw Aeneas' little son
Led by Achates to the Trojan fleet.
If it be so, his father means to fly.
But here he is. Now, Dido, try thy wit.
Aeneas, wherefore go thy men aboard?
Why are thy ships new rigged? or to what end,
Launched from the haven, lie they in the Road?
Pardon me, though I ask. Love makes me ask.
O, pardon me if I resolve thee why.
Aeneas will not feign with his dear love.
I must from hence. This day, swift Mercury,
When I was laying a platform for these walls,
Sent from his father Jove, appeared to me,
And in his name rebuked me bitterly
For lingering here, neglecting Italy.
But yet Aeneas will not leave his love.
I am commanded by immortal Jove
To leave this town and pass to Italy,
And therefore must of force.
These words proceed not from Aeneas' heart.
Not from my heart, for I can hardly go.
And yet I may not stay. Dido, farewell.
Farewell? is this the 'mends for Dido's love?
Do Trojans use to quit their Lovers thus?
Fare well may Dido, so Aeneas stay;
I die if my Aeneas say farewell.
Then let me go and never say farewell.
'let me go!' 'farewell!' 'I must from hence!'
These words are poison to poor Dido's soul.
O speak like my Aeneas, like my love.
Why look'st thou toward the sea? the time hath been
When Dido's beauty chained thine eyes to her.
Am I less fair than when thou saw'st me first?
O, then, Aeneas, 'tis for grief of thee.
Say thou wilt stay in Carthage with thy Queen,
And Dido's beauty will return again.
Aeneas, say how canst thou take thy leave?
Wilt thou kiss Dido? O, thy lips have sworn
To stay with Dido. Canst thou take her hand?
Thy hand and mine have plighted mutual faith.
Therefore, unkind Aeneas, must thou say,
"then let me go, and never say farewell"?
O queen of Carthage, wert thou ugly black,
Aeneas could not choose but hold thee dear.
Yet must he not gainsay the Gods' behest.
The Gods? what Gods be those that seek my death?
Wherein have I offended Jupiter
That he should take Aeneas from mine arms?
O, no! the Gods weigh not what Lovers do.
It is Aeneas calls Aeneas hence,
And woeful Dido, by these blubbered cheeks,
By this right hand, and by our spousal rites,
Desires Aeneas to remain with her.
Hast thou forgot how many neighbor kings
Were up in arms for making thee my love?
How Carthage did rebel, Iarbas storm,
And all the world calls me a second Helen,
For being entangled by a stranger's looks?
So thou wouldst prove as true as Paris did,
Would, as fair Troy was, Carthage might be sacked,
And I be called a second Helena.
Had I a son by thee, the grief were less,
That I might see Aeneas in his face.
Now if thou go'st, what canst thou leave behind
But rather will augment than ease my woe?
In vain, my love, thou spend'st thy fainting breath.
If words might move me, I were overcome.
And wilt thou not be moved with Dido's words?
Thy mother was no Goddess, perjured man,
Nor Dardanus the author of thy stock,
But thou art sprung from Scythian Caucasus,
And Tigers of Hyrcania gave thee suck.
Ah, foolish Dido, to forbear this long!
Wast thou not wracked upon this Libyan shore,
And cam'st to Dido like a Fisher swain?
Repaired not I thy ships, made thee a King,
And all thy needy followers Noblemen?
O Serpent that came creeping from the shore
And I for pity harbored in my bosom,
Wilt thou now slay me with thy venomed sting
And hiss at Dido for preserving thee?
Go, go, and spare not. Seek out Italy.
I hope that that which love forbids me do,
The Rocks and Sea-gulfs will perform at large,
And thou shalt perish in the billows' ways,
To whom poor Dido doth bequeath revenge.
Ay, traitor, and the waves shall cast thee up
Where thou and false Achates first set foot.
Which if it chance, I'll give ye burial
And weep upon your lifeless carcasses,
Though thou nor he will pity me a whit.
Why star'st thou in my face? if thou wilt stay,
Leap in mine arms. Mine arms are open wide.
If not, turn from me, and I'll turn from thee,
For though thou hast the heart to say farewell,
I have not power to stay thee. Is he gone?
Ay, but he'll come again. He cannot go.
He loves me too too well to serve me so.
Yet he that in my sight would not relent
Will, being absent, be obdurate still.
By this is he got to the waterside,
And, see, the Sailors take him by the hand,
But he shrinks back, and now, remembering me,
Returns amain. Welcome, welcome, my love!
But where's Aeneas? ah, he's gone, he's gone!
What means my sister, thus to rave and cry?
O Anna, my Aeneas is aboard,
And leaving me, will sail to Italy.
Once didst thou go, and he came back again.
Now bring him back, and thou shalt be a Queen,
And I will live a private life with him.
Call him not wicked, sister. Speak him fair,
And look upon him with a Mermaid's eye.
Tell him, I never vowed at Aulis' gulf
The desolation of his native Troy,
Nor sent a thousand ships unto the walls,
Nor ever violated faith to him.
Request him gently, Anna, to return.
I crave but this. He stay a tide or two,
That I may learn to bear it patiently.
If he depart thus suddenly, I die.
Run, Anna, run. Stay not to answer me.
I go, fair sister. Heavens grant good success.
O Dido, your little son Ascanius
Is gone. He lay with me last night,
And in the morning he was stol'n from me.
I think some Fairies have beguiled me.
O cursed hag and false dissembling wretch,
That slay'st me with thy harsh and hellish tale,
Thou for some petty gift hast let him go,
And I am thus deluded of my boy.
Away with her to prison presently,
Traitoress too keened and cursed Sorceress!
I know not what you mean by treason, I.
I am as true as any one of yours. 
Away with her. Suffer her not to speak.
My sister comes. I like not her sad looks.
Before I came, Aeneas was aboard,
And, spying me, hoist up the sails amain.
But I cried out, "Aeneas, false Aeneas, stay!"
Then 'gan he wag his hand, which yet held up,
Made me suppose he would have heard me speak.
Then 'gan they drive into the Ocean,
Which when I viewed, I cried, "Aeneas, stay!
Dido, fair Dido, wills Aeneas stay!"
Yet he, whose heart of adamant or flint,
My tears nor plaints could mollify a whit.
Then carelessly I rent my hair for grief,
Which seen to all, though he beheld me not,
They 'gan to move him to redress my ruth
And stay a while to hear what I could say,
But he, clapped under hatches, sailed away.
O Anna, Anna, I will follow him.
How can you go, when he hath all your fleet?
I'll frame me wings of wax like Icarus,
And o'er his ships will soar unto the Sun,
That they may melt and I fall in his arms.
Or else I'll make a prayer unto the waves
That I may swim to him like Triton's niece.
O Anna, fetch Orion's Harp,
That I may tice a Dolphin to the shore
And ride upon his back unto my love.
Look, sister, look! lovely Aeneas' ships!
See, see, the billows heave him up to heaven,
And now down fall the keels into the deep.
O sister, sister, take away the Rocks.
They'll break his ships. O Proteus, Neptune, Jove,
Save, save Aeneas, Dido's liefest love.
Now is he come on shore, safe without hurt.
But see, Achates wills him put to sea,
And all the Sailors merry make for joy.
But he, remembering me, shrinks back again.
See, where he comes. Welcome, welcome, my love.
Ah, sister, leave these idle fantasies.
Sweet sister, cease. Remember who you are.
Dido I am, unless I be deceived.
And must I rave thus for a runagate?
Must I make ships for him to sail away?
Nothing can bear me to him but a ship,
And he hath all my fleet. What shall I do
But die in fury of this oversight?
Ay, I must be the murderer of myself.
No, but I am not; yet I will be straight.
Anna be glad. Now have I found a mean
To rid me from these thoughts of lunacy.
There is a woman famoused for arts,
Daughter unto the Nymphs Hesperides,
Who willed me sacrifice his ticing relics.
Go, Anna, bid my servants bring me fire.
How long will Dido mourn a stranger's flight,
That hath dishonored her and Carthage both?
How long shall I with grief consume my days,
And reap no guerdon for my truest love?
Iarbas, talk not of Aeneas; let him go.
Lay to thy hands, and help me make a fire
That shall consume all that this stranger left,
For I intend a private Sacrifice
To cure my mind that melts for unkind love.
But afterwards, will Dido grant me love?
Ay, ay, Iarbas. After this is done,
None in the world shall have my love but thou.
So! leave me now. Let none approach this place.
Now, Dido, with these relics burn thyself,
And make Aeneas famous through the world
For perjury and slaughter of a Queen.
Here lie the Sword that in the darksome Cave
He drew and swore by to be true to me.
Thou shalt burn first; thy crime is worse than his.
Here lie the garment which I clothed him in
When first he came on shore. Perish thou too.
These letters, lines, and perjured papers all,
Shall burn to cinders in this precious flame.
And now, ye Gods, that guide the starry frame
And order all things at your high dispose,
Grant, though the traitors land in Italy,
They may be still tormented with unrest.
And from mine ashes let a Conqueror rise,
That may revenge this treason to a Queen
By plowing up his Countries with the Sword.
Betwixt this land and that be never league.
Litora litoribus contraria, fluctibus undas
Imprecor, arma armis; pugnent ipsique nepotes.
Live, false Aeneas! truest Dido dies!
O, help, Iarbas! Dido in these flames
Hath burnt herself. Ay me, unhappy me!
Cursed Iarbas, die to expiate
The grief that tires upon thine inward soul.
Dido, I come to thee. Ay me, Aeneas!
What can my tears or cries prevail me now?
Dido is dead, Iarbas slain. Iarbas, my dear love!
O sweet Iarbas, Anna's sole delight.
What fatal destiny envies me thus,
To see my sweet Iarbas slay himself?
But Anna now shall honor thee in death
And mix her blood with thine. This shall I do,
That Gods and men may pity this my death
And rue our ends, senseless of life or breath.
Now, sweet Iarbas, stay! I come to thee!






