<ARPAVS>
Condemned soul, Ate, from lowest hell,
And deadly rivers of th' infernal Jove,
Where bloodless ghosts in pains of endless date
Fill ruthless ears with never-ceasing cries,
Behold, I come in place, and bring beside
The bane of Troy! behold, the fatal fruit,
Raught from the golden tree of Proserpine!
Proud Troy must fall, so bid the gods above,
And stately Ilium's lofty towers be razed
By conquering hands of the victorious foe;
King Priam's palace waste with flaming fire,
Whose thick and foggy smoke, piercing the sky,
Must serve for messenger of sacrifice,
T' appease the anger of the angry heavens;
And Priam's younger son, the shepherd swain,
Paris, th' unhappy organ of the Greeks.
So loath and weary of her heavy load,
The Earth complains unto the hellish prince,
Surcharged with the burden that she nill sustain.
Th' unpartial daughters of Necessity
Been aiders in her suit: and so the twine
That holds old Priam's house, the thread of Troy,
Dame Atropos with knife in sunder cuts.
Done by the pleasure of the powers above,
Whose hests men must obey: and I my part
Perform in Ida vales. Lordings, adieu!
Imposing silence for your task, I end,
Till just assembly of the goddesses
Make me begin the tragedy of Troy.
Silvanus, either Flora doth us wrong,
Or Faunus made us tarry all too long,
For by this mourning mirth it should appear,
The Muses or the goddesses be near.
My fawn was numble, Pan, and whipt apace, --
'T was happy that we caught him up at last, --
The fattest, fairest fawn in all the chase;
I wonder how the knave could skip so fast.
And I have brought a twagger for the nonce.
A bunting lamb; nay, pray you feel; no bones:
Believe me now, my cunning much I miss,
If ever Pan felt fatter lamb than this.
Flora, well met, and for thy taken pain.
Poor country gods, thy debtors we remain.
Believe me, Pan, not all thy lambs and ewes,
Nor, Faunus, all thy lusty bucks and does
(But that I am instructed well to know
What service to the hills and dales I owe),
Could have enforced me to so strange a toil,
Thus to enrich this gaudy, gallant soil.
But tell me, wench, hast done't so trick indeed,
That heaven itself may wonder at the deed?
Not Iris, in her pride and bravery,
Adorns her arch with such variety;
Nor doth the milk-white way, in frosty night,
Appear so fair and beautiful in sight,
As done these fields, and groves, and sweetest flowers.
Along the bubbling brooks and silver glide,
That at the bottom doth in silence slide;
The watery flowers and lilies on the banks,
Like blazing comets, burgeon all in ranks;
Under the hawthorn and the poplar tree,
Where sacred Phoebe may delight to be,
The primrose, and the purple hyacinth,
The dainty violet, and the wholesome minth,
The double daisy, and the cowslip, queen
Of summer flowers, do overpeer the green;
And round about the valley as ye pass,
Ye may ne see for peeping flowers the grass,
That well the mighty Juno, and the rest,
May boldly think to be a welcome guest
O Ida hills, when to approve the thing,
The Queen of Flowers prepares a second spring.
Thou gentle nymph, what thanks shall we repay
To thee that mak'st our fields and woods so gay?
Silvanus, when it is thy hap to see
My workmanship in portraying all the three;
First stately Juno with her port and grace,
Her robes, her lawns, her crownet, and her mace,
Would make thee muse this picture to behold,
Of yellow oxlips bright as burnished gold.
A rare device; and Flora well, perdy,
Did paint her yellow for her jealousy.
Pallas in flowers of hue and colors red;
Her plumes, her helm, her lance, her Gorgon's head,
Her trailing tresses that hang flaring round,
Of July-flowers so graffed in the ground,
That, trust me, sirs, who did the cunning see,
Would at a blush suppose it to be she.
Good Flora, by my flock, 't was very good
To digt her all in red, resembling blood.
Fair Venus of sweet violets in blue,
Her plumes, her pendants, bracelets, and her rings,
Her dainty fan, and twenty other things,
Her lusty mantle waving in the wind,
And every part in color and in kind;
And for her wreath of roses, she nill dare
With Flora's cunning counterfeit compare.
So that what living wight shall chance to see
These goddesses, each placed in her degree,
Portrayed by Flora's workmanship alone,
Must say that art and nature met in one.
A dainty draught to lay her down in blue,
The color commonly betokening true.
This piece of work, compact with many a flower,
And well laid in at entrance of the bower,
Where Phoebe means to make this meeting royal,
Have I prepared to welcome them withal.
And are they yet dismounted, Flora, say,
That we may wend to meet them on the way?
That shall not need: they are at hand by this,
And the conductor of the train hight Rhanis.
Juno hath left her chariot long ago,
And hath returned her peacocks by her rainbow;
And bravely, as becomes the wife of Jove,
Doth honor by her presence to our grove.
Fair Venus she hath let her sparrows fly,
To tend on her and make her melody;
Her turtles and her swans unyoked be,
And flicker near her side for company.
Pallas hath set her tigers loose to feed,
Commanding them to wait when she hath need.
And hitherward with proud and stately pace,
To do us honor in the sylvan chase,
They march, like to the pomp of heaven above,
Juno the wife and sister of King Jove,
The warlike Pallas, and the Queen of Love.
Pipe, Pan, for joy, and let thy shepherds sing;
Shall never age forget this memorable thing.
Clio, the sagest of the Sisters Nine,
To do observance to this dame divine,
Lady of learning and of chivalry,
Is here arrived in fair assembly;
And wandering up and down th' unbeaten ways,
Rings through the wood sweet songs of Pallas' praise.
Hark, Flora, Faunus! here is melody,
A charm of birds, and more than ordinary.
Divinest Pallas, and you sacred dames,
Juno and Venus, honored by your names,
Juno, the wife and sister of King Jove,
Fair Venus, lady-president of Love,
If any entertainment in this place,
That can afford but homely, rude, and base,
It please your godheads to accept in gree,
That gracious thought our happiness shall be.
My mistress Dian, this right well I know,
For love that to this presence she doth owe,
Accounts more honor done to her this day,
Than for our country gods, I dare be bold,
They make such cheer, your presence to behold,
Such jouisance, such mirth, and merriment,
As nothing else their mind might more content:
And that you do believe it to be so,
Fair goddesses, your lovely looks do show.
It rests in fine, for to confirm my talk,
Ye deign to pass along to Dian's walk;
Where she among her troop of maids attends
The fair arrival of her welcome friends.
And we will wait with all observance due,
And do just honor to this heavenly crew.
The God of Shepherds, Juno, ere thou go,
Intends a lamb on thee for to bestow.
Faunus, high ranger in Diana's chase,
Presents a fawn to Lady Venus' grace.
Silvanus gives to Pallas' deity
This gallant bough raught from the oaken tree.
To them that doth this honor to our fields
Her mellow apples poor Pomona yields.
And, gentle gods, these signs of your good will
We take in worth, and shall accept them still.
And, Flora, this to thee among the rest, --
They workmanship comparing with the best,
Let it suffice thy cunning to have power
To call King Jove from forth his heavenly bower.
Hadst thou a lover, Flora, credit me,
I think thou wouldst bedeck him gallantly.
But wend we on; and, Rhanis, lead the way,
That kens the painted paths of pleasant Ida.
Oenone, while we been disposed to walk,
Tell me what shall be subject of our talk?
Thou hast a sort of pretty tales in store,
Dare say no nymph in Ida woods hath more:
Again, beside thy sweet alluring face,
In telling them thou hast a special grace.
Then, prithee, sweet, afford some pretty thing,
Some toy that from thy pleasant wit doth spring.
Paris, my heart's contentment and my choice,
Use thou thy pipe, and I will use my voice;
So shall thy just request not be denied,
And time well spent, and both be satisfied.
Well, gentle nymph, although thou do me wrong,
That can ne tune my pipe unto a song,
Me list this once, Oenone, for thy sake,
This idle task on me to undertake.
And whereon, then, shall be my roundelay?
For thou hast heard my store long since, dare say;
How Saturn did divide his kingdom though
To Jove, to Neptune, and to Dis below;
How mighty men made foul successless war
Against the gods and state of Jupiter;
How Phorcys' imp, that was so trick and fair,
That tangled Neptune in her golden hair,
Became a Gorgon for her lewd misdeed, --
A pretty fable, Paris, for to read,
A piece of cunning, trust me, for the nonce,
That wealth and beauty alter men to stones;
How Salmacis, resembling idleness,
Turns men to women all through wantonness;
How Pluto raught Queen Ceres' daughter thence,
And what did follow of that love-offense;
Of Daphne turned into the laurel tree,
That shows a mirror of virginity;
How fair Narcissus tooting on his shade,
Reproves disdain, and tells how form doth vade;
How cunning Philomela's needle tells
What force in love, what wit in sorrow dwells;
What pains unhappy souls abide in hell,
They say because on earth they lived not well,-
Ixion's wheel, proud Tantal's pining woe,
Prometheus' torment, and a many moe;
How Danaus' daughters ply their endless task,
What toil the toil of Sisyphus doth ask:
But pray you, tell me, Juno, was it so,
As Pallas told me here the tale of Echo?
She was a nymph indeed, as Pallas tells,
A walker, such as in these thickets dwells;
And as she told what subtle juggling pranks
She played with Juno, so she told her thanks:
A tattling trull to come at every call,
And now, forsooth, nor tongue nor life at all.
And though perhaps she was a help to Jove,
And held me chat while he might court his love,
Believe me, dames, I am of this opinion,
He took but little pleasure in the minion;
And whatsoe'er his scapes have been beside
Dare say for him, 'a never strayed so wide:
A lovely nut-brown lass or lusty trull
Have power perhaps to make a god a bull.
Gramercy, gentle Juno, for that jest;
I'faith, that item was worth all the rest.
No matter, Venus, howsoe'er you scorn,
My father, Jove, at that time ware the horn.
The brief is this, Detur pulcherrimae,
Let this unto the fairest given be,
The fairest of the three,-and I am she.
Let this unto the fairest given be,
The fairest of the three,-and I am she.
Let this unto the fairest given be,
The fairest of the three,-and I am she.
Nay, Pallas, by your leave you wander clean:
We must not construe hereof as you mean,
But take the sense as it is plainly meant;
And let the fairest ha't, I am content.
Our reasons will be infinite, I trow,
Unless unto some other point we grow:
But first here's none, methinks, disposed to yield,
And none but will with words maintain the field.
Then, if you will, t' avoid a tedious grudge,
Refer it to the sentence of a judge;
Whoe'er he be that cometh next in place,
Let him bestow the ball and end the case.
So can it not go wrong with me at all.
I am agreed, however it befall:
And yet by common doom, so may it be,
I may be said the fairest of the three.
Then yonder, lo, that shepherd swain is he,
That must be umpire in this controversy!
The nymph is gone, and I, all solitary,
This day (or else me fails my shepherd's skill)
Will tide me passing good or passing ill.
Shepherd, abash not, though at sudden thus
Thou be arrived by ignorance among us,
Nor fear to speak for reverence of the place, 
Chosen to end a hard and doubtful case.
This apple, lo, (nor ask thou whence it came,)
Is to be given unto the fairest dame !
And fairest is, nor she, nor she, but she
Whom, shepherd, thou shalt hirest name to be.
This is thy charge; fulfill without offense,
And she that wins shall give thee recompense.
Dread not to speak, for we have chosen thee
Sith in this case we can no judges be.
And, shepherd, say that I the fairest am,
And thou shalt win good guerdon for the same.
Nay, shepherd, look upon my stately grace,
Because the pomp that 'longs to Juno's mace
Thou mayst not see; and think Queen Juno's name,
To whom old shepherds title works of fame,
Is mighty, and may easily suffice,
At Phoebe's hand, to gain a golden prize.
And for thy meed, sith I am queen of riches,
Empires, and kingdoms, heaps of massy gold, 
Sceptres and diadems curious to behold,
Rich robes, of sumptuous workmanship and cost,
And thousand things whereof I make no boast:
Me list not tempt thee with decaying wealth,
Which is embased by want of lusty health;
But if thou have a mind to fly above,
Y-crowned with fame, near to the seat of Jove,
If thou aspire to wisdom's worthiness,
Whereof thou mayest not see the brightness,
If thou desire honor of chivalry,
To be renowned for happy victory,
To fight it out, and in the champaign field
To shroud thee under Pallas' warlike shield,
To prance on barbed steeds, this honor, lo,
Myself for guerdon shall on thee bestow!
And for encouragement, that thou mayest see
What famous knights Dame Pallas' warriors be,
Behold in Pallas' honor here they come, 
Marching along with sound of thund'ring drum.
Come, shepherd, come, sweet shepherd, look on me,
These bene too hot alarums, these, for thee:
But if thou wilt give me the golden ball,
Cupid my boy shall ha't to play withal,
That, whensoe'er this apple he shall see,
The God of Love himself shall think on thee,
And bid thee look and choose, and he will wound
Whereso thy fancy's object shall be found;
And lightly when he shoots he doth not miss: 
And I will give thee many a lovely kiss,
And come and play with thee on Ida here;
And if thou wilt a face that hath no peer,
A gallant girl, a lusty minion lass,
That can give sport to thee thy bellyful,
To ravish all thy beating veins with joy,
Here is a lass of Venus' court, my boy,
Here, gentle shepherd, here's for thee a piece,
The fairest face, the flower of gallant Greece.
Se Diana nel cielo e una stella 
Chiara e lucente, piena di splendore
Che porge luc' all' affanato cuore;
Se Diana nel ferno e una dea
Che da conforto all' anime dannate
Che per amor son morte desperate;
Se Diana, ch' in terra e delle ninfe
Reina imperativa di dolci fiori,
Tra bosch' e selve da morte a pastori;
Io son un Diana dolce e rara,
Che con li guardi io posso far guerra 
A Dian' infern', in cielo, e in terra. 
Most heavenly dames, was never man as 1,
Poor shepherd swain, so happy and unhappy;
The least of these delights that you devise,
Able to rape and dazzle human eyes.
But since my silence may not pardoned be,
And I appoint which is the fairest she,
Pardon, most sacred dames, sith one, not all,
By Paris' doom must have this golden ball.
Thy beauty, stately Juno, dame divine, 
That like to Phoebus' golden beams doth shine,
Approves itself to be most excellent;
But that fair face that doth me most content,
Sith fair, fair dames, is neither she nor she,
But she whom I shall fairest deem to be,
That face is hers that hight the Queen of Love,
Whose sweetness doth both gods and creatures move;
And if the fairest face deserve the ball,
Fair Venus, ladies, bears it from ye all.
And in this ball doth Venus more delight
Than in her lovely boy fair Cupid's sight.
Come, shepherd, come; sweet Venus is thy friend;
No matter how thou other gods offend.
But he shall rue and ban the dismal day
Wherein his Venus bare the ball away;
And heaven and earth just witnesses shall be,
I will revenge it on his progeny.
Well, Juno, whether we be lief or loath,
Venus hath got the apple from us both. 
O gentle Love, ungentle for thy deed,
A bloody mark With piercing shot to bleed!
Shoot soft, sweet Love, for fear thou shoot amiss,
And hit the heart where my beloved is.
Too fair that fortune were, nor never I
That Love shall seize on her by sympathy.
Then since with Love my prayers bear no boot,
I take the wound, and die at Venus' foot. 
Melpomene, the Muse of tragic songs,
With mournful tunes, in stole of dismal hue,
Assist a silly nymph to wail her woe,
And leave thy lusty company behind.
Thou luckless wreath! becomes not me to wear
The poplar-tree for triumph of my love:
Then, as my joy, my pride of love, is left,
Be thou unclothed of thy lovely green;
And in thy leaves my fortune written be,
And them some gentle wind let blow abroad,
That all the world may see how false of love
False Paris hath to his Oenone been.
Enough, this is the man. Where wons he, then?
About these woods, far from the poplar-tree.
Witness of the vows 'twixt him and me.
Nay, let them go. Nay, not unless you will.
The messenger of heaven, and thither fly,
To seize upon the man whom thou dost love,
To summon him before my father Jove,
To answer matter of great consequence:
And Jove himself will not be long from hence.
Sweet Mercury, and have poor Oenone's cries
For Paris' fault y-pierced th' unpartial skies ?
The same is he, that jolly shepherd's swain.
His flock do graze upon Aurora's plain,
The color of his coat is lusty green; 
That would these eyes of mine had never seen
His 'ticing curled hair, his front of ivory,
Then had not I, poor I, bin unhappy.
No marvel, wench, although we cannot find him,
When all too late the Queen of Heaven doth mind him,
But if thou wilt have physic for thy sore,
Mind him who list, remember thou him no more.
And find some other game, and get thee gone;
For here will lusty suitors come anon,
Too hot and lusty for thy dying vein, 
Such as ne'er wont to make their suits in vain.
Lady, a little once. And art thou changed ?
Fair Queen of Love, I loved not all at once.
The strange affects of my tormented heart,
Whom cruel love hath woeful prisoner caught,
Whom cruel hate hath into bondage brought,
Whom wit no way of safe escape hath taught, 
Enforce me say, in witness of my smart,
Most cruel thou, of all that nature framed.
Fair Lady Venus, let me pardoned be,
That have of long bin well-beloved of thee,
If, as my office bids, myself first brings
To my sweet madam these unwelcome tidings.
What news, what tidings, gentle Mercury,
In midst of my delights, to trouble me?
At Juno's suit, Pallas assisting her,
Sith both did join in suit to Jupiter,
Action is entered in the court of heaven;
And me, the swiftest of the planets seven,
With warrant they have thence dispatched away,
To apprehend and find the man, they say,
That gave from them that self-same ball of gold,
Which, I presume, I do in place behold;
Which man, unless my marks be taken wide,
Is he that sits so near thy gracious side.
This being so, it rests he go from hence,
Before the gods to answer his offense.
What tale is this? doth Juno and her mate
Pursue this shepherd with such deadly hate,
As what was then our general agreement,
To stand unto they nill be now content;
Let Juno jet, and Pallas play her part,
What here I have, I won it by desert;
And heaven and earth shall both confounded be,
Ere wrong in this be done to him or me.
This little fruit, if Mercury can spell,
Will send, I fear, a world of souls to hell.
The angry heavens, for this fatal jar,
Bring forth the man of Troy, that he may hear
Whereof he is to be arraigned here.
Lo, where 'a comes, prepared to plead his case,
Under conduct of lovely Venus' grace !
I have not seen a more alluring boy.
So beauty hight the wrack of Priam's Troy.
Lo, sacred Jove, at Juno's proud complaint,
As erst I gave my pledge to Mercury,
I bring the man whom he did late attaint,
To answer his indictment orderly;
And crave this grace of this immortal senate,
That ye allow the man his advocate.
That may not be; the laws of heaven deny
A man to plead or answer by attorney.
Pallas, thy doom is all too peremptory. 
Venus, that favor is denied him flatly:
He is a man, and therefore by our laws,
Himself, without his aid, must plead his cause.
Then 'bash not, shepherd, in so good a case;
And friends thou hast, as well as foes, in place.
Why, Mercury, why do ye not indict him ?
Soft, gentle Juno, I pray you, do not bite him.
Nay, gods, I trow, you are like to have great silence,
Unless this parrot be commanded hence.
Venus, forbear, be still.-Speak, Mercury. 
If Juno jangle, Venus will reply.
Sacred and just, thou great and dreadful Jove,
And you thrice-reverend powers, whom love nor hate
May wrest awry; if this to me a man,
This fortune fatal be, that I must plead
For safe excusal of my guiltless thought,
The honor more makes my mishap the less,
That I a man must plead before the gods-
Gracious forbearers of the world's amiss-
For her, whose beauty how it hath enticed,
This heavenly senate may with me aver.
But sith nor that nor this may do me boot,
And for myself myself must speaker be,
A mortal man amidst this heavenly presence;
Let me not shape a long defense to them
That ben beholders of my guiltless thoughts.
Then for the deed, that I may not deny,
Wherein consists the full of mine offense,
I did upon command; if then I erred,
I did no more than to a man belonged.
And if, in verdict of their forms divine,
My dazzled eye did swerve or surfeit more
On Venus' face than any face of theirs,
It was no partial fault, but fault of his,
Belike, whose eyesight not so perfect was 
As might discern the brightness of the rest.
And if it were permitted unto men,
Ye gods, to parle with your secret thoughts,
There ben that sit upon that sacred seat,
That would with Paris err in Venus' praise.
But let me cease to speak of error here;
Sith what my hand, the organ of my heart,
Did give with good agreement of mine eye,
My tongue is void with process to maintain.
First, then, arraigned of partiality,
Paris replies, ' Unguilty of the fact ';
His reason is, because he knew no more
Fair Venus' cestron than Dame Juno's mace,
Nor never saw wise Pallas' crystal shield.
Then, as I looked, I loved and liked at once,
And as it was referred from them to me,
To give the prize to her whose beauty best
My fancy did commend, so did I praise
And judge as might my dazzled eye discern. 
A piece of art, that cunningly, perdy,
Refers the blame to weakness of his eye.
Now, for I must add reason for my deed,
Why Venus rather pleased me of the three;
First, in the entrails of my mortal ears,
The question standing upon Beauty's blaze,
The name of her that hight the Queen of Love,
Methought in beauty should not be excelled.
Had it been destined to Majesty,
(Yet will I not rob Venus of her grace,)
Then stately Juno might have borne the ball.
Had it to Wisdom been intituled,
My human wit had given it Pallas then.
But sith unto the fairest of the three
That power, that threw it for my farther ill,
Did dedicate this ball; and safest durst
My shepherd's skill adventure, as I thought,
To judge of form and beauty rather than
Of Juno's state or Pallas' worthiness,
That learned to ken the fairest of the flock,
And praised beauty but by nature's aim;
Behold, to Venus Paris gave this fruit,
A daysman chosen there by full consent,
And heavenly powers should not repent their deeds.
Where it is said, beyond desert of hers
l honored Venus with this golden prize,
Ye gods, alas, what can a mortal man
Discern betwixt the sacred gifts of heaven?
Or, if l may with reverence reason thus:
Suppose I gave, and judged corruptly then,
For hope of that that best did please my thought,
This apple not for beauty's praise alone;
I might offend, sith l was pardoned,
And tempted more than ever creature was
With wealth, with beauty, and with chivalry,
And so preferred beauty before them all,
The thing that hath enchanted heaven itself
And for the one, contentment is my wealth;
A shell of salt will serve a shepherd swain,
A slender banquet in a homely scrip,
And water running from the silver spring.
For arms, they dread no foes that sit so low;
A thorn can keep the wind from off my back,
A sheep-cote thatched a shepherd's palace hight.
Of tragic Muses shepherds con no skill;
Enough is them, if Cupid ben displeased,
To sing his praise on slender oaten pipe.
And thus, thrice-reversed, have I told my tale,
And crave the torment of my guiltless soul
To be measured by my faultless thought. 
If warlike Pallas or the Queen of Heaven
Sue to reverse my sentence by appeal,
Be it as please your majesties divine;
The wrong, the hurt, not mine, if any be,
But hers whose beauty claimed the prize of me.
Venus, withdraw your shepherd for a space,
Till he again be called for into place.
Juno, what will ye after this reply,
But doom with sentence of indifferency?
And if you will but justice in the cause,
The man must quitted be by heaven's laws.
Yea, gentle Jove, when Juno's suits are moved,
Then heaven may see how well she is beloved.
But, madam, fits it majesty divine
In any sort from justice to decline?
Whether the man be guilty, yea or no,
That doth not hinder our appeal, I trow.
Phoebus, I wot, amid this heavenly crew,
There be that have to say as well as you.
And, Juno, I with them, and they with me,
In law and right must needfully agree.
I grant ye may agree, but be content
To doubt upon regard of your agreement.
And if ye marked, the man in his defense
Said thereof as 'a might with reverence.
And did that very well, l promise ye.
No doubt, sir, you could note it cunningly.
Well, Juno, if ye will appeal, ye may,
But first dispatch the shepherd hence away.
Then Vulcan's dame is like to have the wrong.
And that in passion doth to Mars belong.
Call Venus and the shepherd in again.
And rid the man that he may know his pain.
His pain, his pain, his never-dying pain,
A cause to make a many more complain.
My luck is loss, howe'er my love do speed:
I fear me Paris shall but rue his deed. 
From Ida woods now wends the shepherd's boy,
That in his bosom carries fire to Troy.
Venus, these ladies do appeal, you see,
And that they may appeal the gods agree:
It resteth, then, that you be well content
To stand in this to our final judgment;
And if King Priam's son did well in this,
The law of heaven will not lead amiss.
But, sacred Jupiter, might thy daughter choose,
She might with reason this appeal refuse:
Yet, if they be unmoved in their shames,
Be it a stain and blemish to their names:
A deed, too, far unworthy of the place,
Unworthy Pallas lance or Juno's mace:
And if to beauty it bequeathed be,
I doubt not but it will return to me.
Venus, there is no more ado than so,
It resteth where the gods do it bestow.
But, ladies, under favor of your rage,
Howe'er it be, you play upon the vantage.
Then, dames, that we more freely may debate,
And hear th' indifferent sentence of this senate,
Withdraw you from this presence for a space,
Till we have thoroughly questioned of the case:
Dian shall be your guide; nor shall you need
Yourselves t' inquire how things do here succeed;
We will, as we resolve, give you to know, 
By general doom how everything doth go.
Thy will, my wish.-Fair ladies, will ye wend?
Beshrew her whom this sentence doth offend.
But tell me now without some more ado,
Who is the fairest she, and do not flatter.
Upon comparison hangs all the matter:
That done, the quarrel and the strife were ended.
Because 'tis known, the quarrel is pretended.
Mars, you have reason for your speech, perdy;
My dame, I trow, is fairest in your eye.
Or, Vulcan, I should do her double wrong.
About a toy we tarry here too long.
Give it by voices, voices give the odds;
A trifle so to trouble all the gods!
Believe me, Saturn, be it so for me.
For me.  For me.  For me, if Jove agree.
And, gentle gods, I am indifferent;
But then I know who's likely to be shent.
Thrice-reverend gods, and thou, immortal Jove,
If Phoebus may, as him doth much behove,
Be licensed, according to our laws,
To speak uprightly in this doubted cause,
(Sith women's wits work men's unceasing woes,)
To make them friends, that now bin friendless foes,
And peace to keep with them, with us, and all,
That make their title to this golden ball;
(Nor think, ye gods, my speech doth derogate
From sacred power of this immortal senate;)
Refer this sentence where it doth belong:
In this, say I, fair Phoebe hath the wrong;
Not that I mean her beauty bears the prize,
But that the holy law of heaven denies
One god to meddle in another's power;
And this befell so near Diana's bower,
As for th' appeasing this unpleasant grudge,
In my conceit, she hight the fittest judge.
If Jove control not Pluto's hell with charms,
If Mars have sovereign power to manage arms,
If Bacchus bear no rule in Neptune's sea,
Nor Vulcan's fire doth Saturn's scythe obey,
Suppress not then, 'gainst law and equity,
Diana's power in her own territory,
Whose regiment, amid her sacred bowers,
As proper hight as any rule of yours.
Well may we so wipe all the speech away,
That Pallas, Juno, Venus, hath to say,
And answer that, by justice of our laws
We were not suffered to conclude the cause.
And this to me most equal doom appears,
A woman to be judge among her feres.
Apollo hath found out the only mean
To rid the blame from us and trouble clean.
We are beholding to his sacred wit.
I can commend and well allow of it;
And so derive the matter from us all,
That Dian have the giving of the ball.
So Jove may clearly excuse him in the case, 
Where Juno else would chide and brawl apace.
And now it were some cunning to divine
To whom Diana will this prize resign.
Sufficeth me, it shall be none of mine.
Vulcan, though thou be black, thou'rt nothing fine.
Go bathe thee, Bacchus, in a tub of wine;
The ball's as likely to be mine as thine. 
Lo, ladies, far beyond my hope and will, you
This thankless office is imposed to me;
Wherein if you will rest as well content,
As Dian will be judge indifferent,
My egall doom shall none of you offend,
And of this quarrel make a final end:
And therefore, whether you be lief or loath,
Confirm your promise with some sacred oath.
Phoebe, chief mistress of this sylvan chase,
Whom gods have chosen to conclude the case
That yet in balance undecided lies,
Touching bestowing of this golden prize,
I give my promise and mine oath withal,
By Styx, by heaven's power imperial,
By all that 'longs to Pallas' deity,
Her shield, her lance, ensigns of chivalry,
Her sacred wreath of olive and of bay,
Her crested helm, and else what Pallas may,
That wheresoe'er this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand doth hold,
Unpartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike or quarrel any moe,
Juno shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abide.
And, lovely Phoebe, for I know thy doom
Will be no other than shall thee become,
Behold, I take thy dainty hand to kiss,
And with my solemn oath confirm my promise,
By Styx, by Jove's immortal empery,
By Cupid's bow, by Venus' myrtle-tree,
By Vulcan's gift, my cestron and my fan,
By this red rose, whose color first began
When erst my wanton boy (the more his blame;
Did draw his bow awry and hurt his dame,
By all the honor and the sacrifice
That from Cithaeron and from Paphos rise,
That wheresoe'er this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand doth hold,
Unpartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike or quarrel any moe,
Venus shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abide.
It is enough, and, goddesses, attend.
There wons within these pleasant shady woods,
Where neither storm nor sun's distemperature
Have power to hurt by cruel heat or cold,
Under the climate of the milder heaven;
Where seldom lights Jove's angry thunderbolt, 
For favor of that sovereign earthly peer;
Where whistling winds make music 'mong the trees,
Far from disturbance of our country gods,
Amidst the cypress-springs, a gracious nymph,
That honors Dian for her chastity,
And likes the labors well of Phoebe's groves.
The place Elysium hight, and of the place
Her name that governs there Eliza is;
A kingdom that may well compare with mine,
An ancient seat of kings, a second Troy, 
Y-compassed round with a commodious sea:
Her people are y-cleped Angeli,
Or, if I miss, a letter is the most.
She giveth laws of justice and of peace;
And on her head, as fits her fortune best,
She wears a wreath of laurel, gold and palm;
Her robes of purple and of scarlet dye;
Her veil of white, as best befits a maid:
Her ancestors live in the House of Fame:
She giveth arms of happy victory,
And flowers to deck her lions crowned with gold.
This peerless nymph, whom heaven and earth belove,
This paragon, this only, this is she,
In whom do meet so many gifts in one,
On whom our country gods so often gaze,
In honor of whose name the Muses sing:
In state Queen Juno's peer, for power in arms
And virtues of the mind Minerva's mate,
As fair and lovely as the Queen of Love,
As chaste as Dian in her chaste desires:
The same is she, if Phoebe do no wrong,
To whom this ball in merit doth belong.
If this be she whom some Zabeta call,
To whom thy wisdom well bequeaths the ball,
I can remember, at her day of birth,
How Flora with her flowers strewed the earth,
How every power with heavenly majesty
In person honored that solemnity.
The lovely Graces were not far away,
They threw their balm for triumph of the day.
And vowed her life with favor to prolong.
Then first gan Cupid's eyesight waxen dim;
Belike Eliza's beauty blinded him.
To this fair nymph, not earthly, but divine,
Contents it me my honor to resign.
To this fair queen, so beautiful and wise,
Pallas bequeaths her title in the prize.
To her whom Juno's looks so well become,
The Queen of Heaven yields at Phoebe's doom; 
And glad I am Diana found the art,
Without offense so well to please desert.
Then mark my tale. The usual time is nigh,
When wont the Dames of Life and Destiny,
In robes of cheerful colors, to repair
To this renowned queen so wise and fair,
With pleasant songs this peerless nymph to greet:
Clotho lays down her distaff at her feet,
And Lachesis doth pull the thread at length,
The third with favor gives it stuff and strength,
And for contrary kind affords her leave,
As her best likes, her web of life to weave,
This time we will attend, and in mean while
With some sweet song the tediousness beguile.
Humanae vitae filum sic volvere Parcae.
Humanae vitae filum sic tendere Parcae.
Humanae vitae filum sic scindere Parcae.
Gracious and wise, fair Queen of rare renown,
Whom heaven and earth belove, amid thy train,
Noble and lovely peers, to honor thee
And do thee favor more than may belong
By nature's law to any earthly wight,
Behold continuance of our yearly due:
Th' unpartial Dames of Destiny, we meet,
As have the gods and we agreed in one,
In reverence of Eliza's noble name;
And humbly, lo, her distaff Clotho yields!
Her spindle Lachesis, and her fatal reel,
Lays down in reverence at Eliza's feet.
Dame Atropos, according as her feres,
To thee, fair Queen, resigns her fatal knife:
Long live the noble phoenix of our age,
Our fair Eliza, our Zabeta fair!
And lo, beside this rare solemnity,
And sacrifice these dames as wont to do,
A favor, far indeed contrary kind,
Bequeathed is unto thy worthiness,- 
This prize from heaven and heavenly goddesses!
Accept it, then, thy due by Dian's doom,
Praise of the Wisdom, Beauty, and the State,
That best becomes thy peerless excellency.
So, fair Eliza, Venus doth resign
The honor of this honor to be thine.
So is the Queen of Heaven content likewise
To yield to thee her title in the prize.
So Pallas yields the praise hereof to thee,
For Wisdom, princely State, and peerless Beauty.
<EDW1VS.txt>
My Lord Lieutenant of Glocester, and Lord Mortimer,
To do you honor in your sovereign's eyes,
That as we hear is newly come aland	
From Palestine, with all his men of war, 
The poor remainder of the royal fleet, 
Preserved by miracle in Sicil road,
Go mount your coursers, meet him on the way. 
Pray him to spur his steed, minutes and hours,
Until his mother see her princely son,
Shining in glory of his safe return.
Illustrious England, ancient seat of kings, 
Whose chivalry hath royalized thy fame,
That sounding bravely through terrestrial vale, 
Proclaiming conquests, spoils, and victories, 
Rings glorious echoes through the farthest world. 
What warlike nation, trained in feats of arms, 
What barbarous people, stubborn or untamed,
What climate under the meridian signs 
Or frozen zone under his brumal stage
Erst have not quaked and trembled at the name 
Of Britain, and her mighty conquerors?
Her neighbor realms, as Scotland, Denmark, France,
Awed with their deeds and jealous of her arms, 
Have begged defensive and offensive leagues. 
Thus Europe, rich and mighty in her kings,
Hath feared brave England, dreadful in her kings. 
And now to eternize Albion's champions,
Equivalent with Trojans' ancient fame, 
Comes lovely Edward from Jerusalem,
Veering before the wind, plowing the sea,
His stretched sails filled with the breath of men 
That through the world admires his manliness. 
And lo at last, arrived in Dover road,
Longshanks, your king, your glory and our son,
With troops of conquering lords and warlike knights,
Like bloody-crested Mars, o'erlooks his host, 
Higher than all his army by the head,
Marching along as bright as Phoebus' eyes. 
And we, his mother, shall behold our son, 
And England's peers shall see their sovereign.
Glocester! Edward! Oh, my sweet sons.
Help, ladies! O ingrateful destiny, 
To welcome Edward with this tragedy.
Patient, your highness. 'Tis but mother's love,
Received with sight of her thrice-valiant sons. 
Madam, amaze not. See his majesty
Returned with glory from the holy land.
Brave sons, the worthy champions of our God,
The honorable soldiers of the highest,
Bear with your mother, whose abundant love 
With tears of joys salutes your sweet return 
From famous journeys, hard and fortunate. 
But, lords, alas, how heavy is our loss
Since your departure to these Christian wars. 
The king your father, and the prince your son, 
And your brave uncle, Almain's emperor,

Take comfort, madam, leave these sad laments. 
Dear was my uncle, dearer was my son, 
And ten times dearer was my noble father.
Yet were their lives valued at thousand worlds, 
They cannot 'scape the arrest of dreadful death,
Death that doth seize and summon all alike. 
Then, leaving them to heavenly blessedness, 
To join in thrones of glory with the just, 
I do salute your royal majesty,
My gracious mother queen, and you, my lords,
Gilbert de Clare, Sussex, and Mortimer,
And all the princely states of England's peers, 
With health and honor to your hearts' content, 
And welcome wished England on whose ground 
These feet so often have desired to tread. 
Welcome, sweet queen, my fellow traveler, 
Welcome, sweet Nell, my fellow mate,
Whose eyes have seen the slaughtered Saracens, 
Piled in the ditches of Jerusalem.
And lastly, welcome manly followers,
That bear the scars of honor and of arms
And on your war drums carry crowns as kings, 
Crown mural, naval, and triumphant all,
At view of whom the Turks have trembling fled, 
And Saracens, like sheep before the wolves, 
Have made their cottages in walled towns.
But bulwarks had no fence to beat you back. 
Lords, these are they will enter brazen gates
And tear down lime and mortar with their nails. 
Embrace them, barons, these have got the name 
Of English gentlemen and knights at arms. 
Not one of these but in the champain field 
Hath won his crown, his collar and his spurs. 
Not Caesar, leading through the streets of Rome
The captive kings of conquered nations, 
Was in his princely triumphs honored more 
Than English Edward in this martial sight. 
Countrymen, your limbs are lost in service of the Lord, 
Which is your glory and your country's fame. 
For limbs, you shall have living, lordships, lands, 
And be my counselors in war's affairs. 
Soldiers, sit down. Nell, sit thee by my side. 
These be Prince Edward's pompous treasury.
O glorious Capitol, beauteous Senate house, 
Triumphant Edward, how like sturdy oaks 
Do these thy soldiers circle thee about,
To shield and shelter thee from winter's storms. 
Display thy cross, old Aimes of the Vies. 
Dub on your drums, tanned with India's sun, 
My lusty western lads. Matrevers, thou 
Sound proudly here a perfect point of war 
In honor of thy sovereign's safe return.
Thus Longshanks bids his soldiers Bien venu.
O God, my God, the brightness of my day, 
How oft hast thou preserved thy servant safe, 
By sea and land, yea in the gates of death. 
O God, to thee how highly am I bound
For setting me with these on English ground. 
One of my mansion houses will I give
To be a college for my maimed men,
Where every one shall have an hundred marks 
Of yearly pension to his maintenance,
A soldier that for Christ and country fights 
Shall want no living whilst King Edward lives. 
Lords, you that love me now be liberal 
And give your largess to these maimed men.
Towards this erection doth thy mother give,
Out of her dowry, five thousand pounds of gold, 
To find them surgeons to recure their wounds. 
And whilst this ancient standard bearer lives, 
He shall have forty pound of yearly fee 
And be my beadsman, father, if you please.
Madam, I tell you, England never bred 
A better soldier than your beadsman is,
And that the Soldan and his army felt.
Out of the duchy of rich Lancaster, 
To find soft bedding for their bruised bones, 
Duke Edmund gives three thousand pounds.

Happy is England under Edward's reign
When men are had so highly in regard
That nobles strive who shall remunerate 
The soldiers' resolution with regard.
My Lord of Glocester, what is your benevolence?
A thousand marks, and please your majesty.

Five hundred pound, and please your majesty.
What say you, Sir David of Brecknock?
To a soldier, Sir David cannot be too liberal. 
Yet that I may give no more than a poor knight is able 
And not presume as a mighty earl,
I give, my lord, four hundred fourscore and nineteen pounds.
And so, my Lord of Sussex, I am behind you an ace.
And yet, Sir David, ye amble after apace.
Well said, David. Thou couldst not be a Camber Briton
If thou didst not love a soldier with thy heart. 
Let me see now if my arithmetic will serve

Why, my lord, I hope you mean 
I shall be a benefactor to my fellow soldiers.

Nay, my lord, I am of age to set it down for myself.
You will allow what I do, will you not?

Were it to the value of my kingdom.







There, my lord, neither one, two, nor three,
But a poor cipher in agrum, to enrich good fellows 
And compound their figure in their kind.
Madam, I commend your composition, 
An argument of your honorable disposition.


A princely gift and worthy memory.
My gracious lord, as erst I was assigned 

By your princely father King Henry,
Who on his death bed still did call for you,
And dying, willed to you the diadem.

And seeing by doom of heavens it is decreed, 
And lawful line of our succession,
Unworthy Edward is become your king, 
We take it as a blessing from on high, 
And will our coronation be solemnized 
Upon the fourteenth of December next.
Upon the fourteenth of December next?
Alas, my lord, the time is all too short
And sudden for so great solemnity.
A year were scarce enough to set awork
Tailors, embroiderers, and men of rare device
For preparation of so great estate.
Trust me, sweet Ned, hardly shall I bethink me
In twenty weeks what fashion robes to wear.
I pray thee, then, defer it till the spring, 
That we may have our garments point device. 
I mean to send for tailors into Spain,
That shall confer of some fantastic suits
With those that be our cunning'st Englishmen. 
What? let me brave it now or never, Ned.
Madam, content ye. Would that were greatest care.
You shall have garments to your heart's desire. 
I never read but Englishmen excelled
For change of rare devices every way.
Yet pray thee, Ned, my love, my lord and king,
My fellow soldier and compeer in arms,
Do so much honor to thy Elinor
To wear a suit that she shall give thy grace, 
Of her own cost and workmanship, perhaps.
'Twill come by leisure, daughter, then, I fear.
Thou'rt too fine-fingered to be quick at work.
'Twixt us a greater matter breaks no square.
So be it such, my Nell, as may beseem
The majesty and greatness of a king.
And now, my lords and loving friends,
Follow your general to the court,
After his travels, to repose him then,
There to recount with pleasure what is past, 
Of war's alarums, showers, and sharpest storms.
Now, Elinor, now, England's lovely queen,
Bethink thee of the greatness of thy state, 
And how to bear thyself with royalty
Above the other queens of Christendom, 
That Spain, reaping renown by Elinor, 
And Elinor, adding renown to Spain,
Britain may her magnificence admire.
I tell thee, Joan, what time our highness sits 
Under our royal canopy of state,
Glistering with pendants of the purest gold, 
Like as our seat were spangled all with stars, 
The world shall wonder at our majesty 
As if the daughter of eternal Ops,
Turned to the likeness of vermillion fumes, 
Where from her cloudy womb the centaurs leapt, 
Were in her royal seat enthronized.
Madam, if Joan thy daughter may advise, 
Let not your honor make your manners change. 
The people of this land are men of war,
The women courteous, mild, and debonair, 
Laying their lives at princes' feet
That govern with familiar majesty.
But if their sovereigns once 'gin swell with pride, 
Disdaining commons' love which is the strength 
And sureness of the richest commonwealth, 
That prince were better live a private life 
Than rule with tyranny and discontent.
Indeed, we count them headstrong Englishmen.
But we shall hold them in a Spanish yoke
And make them know their lord and sovereign. 
Come, daughter, let us home for to provide. 
For all the cunning workmen of this isle 
In our great chamber shall be set awork, 
And in my hall shall bountifully feed.
My king, like Phoebus, bridegroomlike shall march 
With lovely Thetis to her glassy bed,	
And all the lookers on shall stand amazed 
To see King Edward and his lovely queen 
Sit radiant in England's stately throne.
Come, Rice, and rouse thee for thy country's good,
Follow the man that means to make you great. 
Follow Lluellen, rightful Prince of Wales, 
Sprung from the loins of great Cadwallader, 
Descended from the loins of Trojan Brute.
And though the traitorous Saxons, Normans, Danes, 
Have pent the true remains of glorious Troy
Within the western mountains of this isle, 
Yet have we hope to climb these stony pales, 
When Londoners, as Romans erst, amazed, 
Shall trembling cry, "Lluellen's at the gate!"
T' accomplish this, thus have I brought you forth, 
Disguised, to Milford Haven. Here attend 
The landing of the Lady Elinor.
Her stay doth make me muse. The wind stands fair, 
And ten days hence did we expect them here. 
Neptune, be favorable to my love
And steer her keel with thy three-forked mace, 
That from this shore I may behold her sails 
And in my arms embrace my dearest dear.
Brave Prince of Wales, this honorable match 
Cannot but turn to Cambria's common good. 
Simon de Montfort, her thrice-valiant son, 
That in the barons' wars was general,
Was loved and honored of the Englishmen. 
When they shall hear she's your espoused wife, 
Assure your grace, we shall have great supply 
To make our roads in England mightily.
What we resolved must strongly be performed 
Before the king return from Palestine.
Whilst he wins glory at Jerusalem,
Let us win ground upon the Englishmen.
Owen ap Rice, 'tis that Lluellen fears. 
I fear me Edward will be come ashore 
Ere we can make provision for the war. 
But be it as it will, within his court 
My brother David is, that bears a face
As if he were my greatest enemy.
He by this craft shall creep into her heart
And give intelligence from time to time 
Of her intentions, drifts and strategems. 
Here let us rest upon the salt sea shore, 
And while our eyes long for our heart's desires, 
Let us like friends pastime us on the sands. 
Our frolic minds are ominous for good.











































What tidings bringeth Guenther with his haste?
Say, man, what bodes thy message, good or bad?
Bad, my lord. And all in vain I wot 
Thou darest thine eyes upon the wallowing main, 
As erst did Aegus to behold his son,
To welcome and receive thy welcome love. 
And sable sails he saw, and so mayest thou, 
For whose mishap the brackish seas lament. 


Landed he is at Dover with his men, 
From Palestine safe, with his English lords, 
Received received in triumphs like an earthly god. 
He lives to wear his father's diadem
And sway the sword of British Albion.


Hath amorous Neptune gazed upon my love
And stopped her passage with his forked mace? 
Or that I rather fear, O deadly fear!
Enamored Nereus, doth he withhold my Elinor?
Nor Neptune, Nereus, nor other god 
Withholdeth from my gracious lord his love. 
But cruel Edward, that injurious king,
Withholds thy liefest lovely Elinor,
Ta'en in pinnace on the narrow seas
By four tall ships of Bristow, and with her, 
Lord Emerick, her unhappy noble brother,
As from Montargis hitherward they sailed.
This, say in brief. These letters tell at large.
Is Longshanks, then, so lusty now become? 
Is my fair love, my beauteous Elinor, ta'en?
Villains! Damned villains, not to guard her safe 
Or fence her sacred person from her foes. 
Sun, couldst thou shine and see my love beset, 
And didst not clothe thy clouds in fiery coats 
O'er all the heavens, with winged sulphur flames, 
As when the beams like mounted combatants
Battled with Python in the fallowed lays? 
But if kind Cambria deign me good aspect
To make me chiefest Brute of western Wales,
I'll short that gain-legged Longshanks by the top 
And make his flesh my murdering falchion's food. 
To arms, true Britons, sprung of Trojans' seed, 
And with your swords write in the book of time 
Your British names in characters of blood. 
Owen ap Rice, while we stay for further force, 
Prepare, away in post, and take with thee 
A hundred chosen of thy countrymen,
And scour the marches with your Welshmen's hooks, 
That Englishmen may think the devil is come. 
Rice shall remain with me. Make thou thy bode 
In resolution to revenge these wrongs
With blood of thousands guiltless of this rage. 
Fly thou on them amain. Edward, my love 
Be thy life's bane. Follow me, countrymen! 
Words make no way. My Elinor is surprised. 
Robbed am I of the comfort of my life. 
And know I this, and am not venged on him?


For this day's gentle princely service done 
To Edward, England's king and Scotland's lord. 
Our coronation's due solemnity
Is ended with applause of all estates.
Now, then, let us appose and rest us here. 
But specially we thank you, gentle lords, 
That you so well have governed your griefs, 
As being grown unto a general jar.
You choose King Edward, by your messengers, 
To calm, to qualify, and to compound.
Thank Britons' strife, of Scotland's climbing peers. 
I have no doubt, fair lords, but you well wot 
How factions waste the richest commonwealth, 
And discord spoils the seats of mighty kings. 
The barons' war, a tragic, wicked war,
Nobles, how hath it shaken England's strength. 
Industriously, it seems to me, you have
Loyally ventured to prevent this shock.
For which, sith you have chosen me your judge, 
My lords, will you stand to what I shall award?
Victorious Edward, to whom the Scottish kings 
Owe homage as their lord and sovereign, 
Amongst us nine is but one lawful king. 
But might we all be judges in the case, 
Then should in Scotland be nine kings at once, 
And this contention never set or limited. 
To stay these jars we jointly make appeal 
To thy imperial throne, who knows our claims. 
We stand not on our titles before your grace, 
But do submit ourselves to your award. 
And whom your majesty shall name to be our king, 
To him we'll yield obedience as a king. 
Thus willingly, and of our own accord, 
Doth Scotland make great England's king their judge.
Then, nobles, since you all agree in one, 
That for a crown so disagree in all,
Since what I do shall rest irrevocable.
Hold up your hands in sight, with general voice, 
That are content to stand to our award.
They all hold up their hands, and say, "We shall."
Deliver me the golden diadem.
Lo, here I hold the goal for which ye strived. 
And here, behold my worthy men at arms, 
For chivalry and worthy wisdom's praise 
Worthy, each one, to wear a diadem. 
Expect my doom, as erst at Ida hills 
The goddesses divine waited the award
Of Dardan's son. Baliol, stand farthest forth. 
Baliol, behold, I give thee the Scottish crown. 
Wear it with heart and with thankfulness.
Sound trumpets, and say all after me,
"God save King Baliol, the Scottish king!"
Thus, lords, though you require no reason why, 
According to the conscience in the case, 
I make John Baliol your anointed king. 
Honor and love him as behoves him best 
That is in peace of Scotland's crown possessed.
Thanks, royal England, for thy honor done, 
This justice that hath calmed our civil strife, 
Shall now be ceased with honorable love. 

We will erect a college of my name. 
In Oxford will I build, for memory 
Of Baliol's bounty and his gratitude. 
And let me happy days no longer see 
Than here to England loyal I shall be.
Now, brave John Baliol, Lord of Galloway 
And King of Scots, shine with thy golden head. 
Shake thy spears in honor of his name,
Under whose royalty thou wearest the same.
And, lovely England, to thy lovely queen, 
Lovely Queen Elinor, unto her turn thy eye, 
Whose honor cannot but love thee well.
The welkin, spangled through with golden spots, 
Reflects no finer in a frosty night
Than lovely Longshanks in his Elinor's eye. 
So, Ned, thy Nell in every part of thee,
Thy person's guarded with a troop of queens, 
And every queen as brave as Elinor.
Give glory to these glorious crystal quarries, 
Where every robe an object entertains 
Of rich device and princely majesty.
Thus, like Narcissus, diving in the deep, 
I die in honor and in England's arms.
And if I drown, it is in my delight,
Whose company is chiefest life in death, 
From forth whose coral lips I suck the sweet 
Wherewith are dainty Cupid's caudles made. 
Then live or die, brave Ned, or sink or swim, 
An earthly bliss it is to look on him.
On thee, sweet Ned, it shall become thy 
Nell Bounteous to be unto the beauteous.
O'er pry the palms, sweet fountains of my bliss, 
And I will stand on tiptoe for a kiss.
He had no thought of any gentle heart 
That would not seize desire for such desert.
If any heavenly joy in women be,
Sweet of all sweets, sweet Nell, it is in thee.
Now, lords, along. By this the Earl of March, 
Lord Mortimer, o'er Cambria's mountain tops 
Hath ranged his men, and feels Lluellen's mind.
To which confines, that well in wasting be, 
Our solemn service of coronation past,
We will amain to back our friends at need. 
And into Wales our men at arms shall march, 
And we with them, in person, foot by foot. 
Brother of Scotland, you shall to your home 
And live in honor there, fair England's friend.
And thou, sweet Nell, queen of King Edward's heart, 
Shall now come lesser at thy dainty love, 
And at christening meet thy loving peers, 
When storms are past and we have cooled the rage 
Of these rebellious Welshmen that contend 
'Gainst England's majesty and Edward's crown. 
Sound trumpets. Heralds, lead the train along. 
This be King Edward's feast and holiday.
Soft, is it not Meredith I behold?
All good, all friends. Meredith, see the man
Must make us great and raise Lluellen's head. 
Fight thou, Lluellen, for thy friend and thee.
Fight maugre fortune. Strong, our battles, strong! 
And bear thy foes before thy pointed lance.
Not too much prowess, good my lord, at once. 
Some talk of policy another while.
How come my limbs hurt at this assault?
Hurt for our good, Meredith. Make account. 
Sir David's wit is full of good device
And kindly will perform what he pretends.
Enough of this, my lord, at once. 
What, will you that I hold the king in hand? 
Or what, shall I especially advise,
Sitting in council with the English lords, 
That so my counsel shall avail my friends?
David, if thou wilt best for me devise, 
Advise my love be rendered to my hand.
Tell them the chains that Mulciber erst made 
To tie Prometheus' limbs to Caucasus,
Nor furies' fangs, shall hold me long from her, 
But I will have her from the usurper's tent, 
My beauteous Elinor. If aught in this,
If in this case thy wit may boot thy friends, 
Express it, then, in this, in nothing else.
Aye, there's a card that puts us to our trump. 
For might I see the star of Leicester's loins, 
It were enough to darken and obscure 
This Edward's glory, fortune, and his pride. 
First, hereof can I put you out of doubt. 
Lord Mortimer of the king hath her in charge 
And honorably entreats your Elinor.
Some think he prays Lluellen were in heaven, 
And thereby hopes to coach his love on earth.
No, where Lluellen mounts, there Ellen flies.
Inspeakable are my thoughts for her.
She is not from me in death to be divorced.
Go to, it shall be so, so shall it be.
Edward is full resolved of thy faith. 
So are the English lords and barons all.
Then what may let thee to intrude on them 
Some new-found stratagem to feel their wit?
It is enough. Meredith, take my weapons. 
I am your prisoner. Say so, at the least. 
Go hence, and when you parley on the walls, 
Make show of monstrous tyranny you intend 
To execute on me, as on the man
That shamefully rebels 'gainst kin and kind. 
Unless thou have thy love, and make thy peace 
With such conditions as shall best concern, 
David must die, say thou, a shameful death. 
Edward, perhaps, with ruth and pity moved, 
Will in exchange yield Elinor to thee, 
And thou by me shalt gain thy heart's desire.
Sweetly advised, David! Thou blessest me, 
My brother David, lengthener of my life.
Friends, gratulate to me my joyful hopes.
Why, barons, suffer ye our foes to breathe?
Assault, assault, and charge them all amain!
They fear, they fly, they faint, they fight in vain. 
But where is gentle David in this din?
Loth were I aught but good should him betide.
Where is the proud disturber of our state?
Traitor to Wales and to his sovereign.
Usurper, here I am. What dost thou crave?
Welshman, allegiance which thou owest thy king.
Traitor, no king, that seeks thy country's sack.
The famous renegade of Christendom.
Ambitious rebel, knowest thou what I am,
How great, how famous, and how fortunate? 
And darest thou carry arms against me here,
Even when thou shouldst do reverence at my feet?
Yea, feared and honored in the farthest parts 
Hath Edward been, thy noble Henry's son. 
Traitor, this sword unsheathed hath shined oft 
With reeking in the blood of Saracens. 
When, like to Perseus on his winged steed, 
Brandishing bright the blade of adamant 
That aged Saturn gave fair Maia's son, 
Conflicting then with Gorgon in the vale, 
Sitting before the gates of Nazareth, 
My horse's hoofs I stained in pagans' gore, 
Sending whole centuries of heathen souls
To Pluto's house. This sword, this thirsty sword, 
Aims at thy head and shall, I hope, ere long 
Gage and divide thy bowels and thy bulk, 
Disloyal villain thou, and what is more.
Why, Longshanks, think'st thou I will be scared with words?
No, didst thou speak in thunder like to Jove, 
Or shouldst as Briareus shake at once
A hundred bloody swords with bloody hands, 
I tell thee, Longshanks, here he faceth thee
Whom nought can daunt, no, not the stroke of death. 
Resolved ye see. But see the chance of war. 
Knowest thou a traitor and thou see his head?
Then, Longshanks, look this villain in the face.
This rebel, he hath wrought his country's wrack, 
Base rascal, hardened, hated in his kind, 
Object of wrath and subject of revenge.
Lluellen, call'st thou this the chance of war?
Bad for us all, pardie, but worse for him.
Courage, Sir David. Kings, thou knowest, must die, 
And noble minds all dastard fear defy.
Renowned England, star of Edward's globe, 
My liefest lord and sweetest sovereign,
Glorious and happy is this chance to me,
To reap this fame and honor in my death: 
That I was hewed with foul, defiled hands
For my beloved king, and country's good,
And died in grace and favor with my prince. 
Seize on me, bloody butchers, with your paws. 
It is but temporal that you can inflict.
Bravely resolved, brave soldier, by my life.

Lluellen, in the midst of all thy braves, 
How wilt thou use thy brother thou hast ta'en? 
Wilt thou let his master ransom him?
No, nor his mistress, gallant Mortimer, 
With all the gold and silver of the land.
Ransom this Judas to his father's line, 
Ransom this traitor to his brother's life! 
No. Take that earnest penny of thy death.
This touch, my lord, comes nothing near the mark.
O damned villain, hold thy hands! Ask and have.
We will not ask nor have. Seest thou these tools?
These be the dogs shall bait him to the death 
And shall by piecemeal tear his cursed flesh. 
And in thy sight, here shall he hang and pine.
O villains, traitors, how will I be venged?

That fury menaceth. See thy words' effects.
O gracious heavens, dissolve me into clay! 
This tyranny is more than flesh can bear.
Bear it, brave mind, sith nothing but thy blood
May satisfy in this extreme estate.
My lord, it is in vain to threaten them. 
They are resolved, ye see, upon his death.
Sussex, his death! They all shall buy it dear.
Offer them any favor for his life,
Pardon, or peace, or aught what is beside.
So love me God, as I regard my friends.
Lluellen, let me have thy brother's life
Even at what rate and ransom thou wilt name.
Edward, "King Edward," as thou list be termed,
Thou knowest thou hast my beauteous Elinor. 
Produce her forth to plead for David's life.
She may obtain more than a host of men.
Wilt thou exchange thy prisoner for thy love?
Talk no more to me. Let me see her face.
Why, will your majesty be all so base 
To stoop to his demands in every thing?
Fetch her at once. Good Mortimer, be gone.
I go, but how unwilling, heaven doth know.
Apace, Mortimer, if thou love thy friend. 
I go for dearer than I leave behind. 
See, Sussex, how he bleedeth in my eye
That beareth fortune's shock triumphantly.

News, my lord. A star from out the sea,
The same is risen and made a summer's day.
Nell, sweet Nell, do I behold thy face?
Fall, heavens; fleet, stars; shine, Phoebus' lamp, no more.
This is the planet lends this world her light, 
Star of my fortune, this that shineth bright, 
Queen of my heart, loadstar of my delight, 
Fair mold of beauty, miracle of fame! 
Oh, let me die with Elinor in mine arms. 
What honor shall I lend thy loyalty
Or praise unto thy sacred deity?

Good cheer, Sir David. We shall up anon.
Die, Mortimer, thy life is almost gone.
Sweet Prince of Wales, were I within thine arms,
Then should I in peace possess my love, 
And heavens open fair their crystal gates, 
That I may see the palace of my intent.
Lluellen, set thy brother free. 
Let me have him, thou shalt have Elinor.
Sooth, Edward, I do prize my Elinor 
Dearer than life, but there belongeth more 
To these affairs than my content in love.
And to be short, if thou wilt have thy man,
Of whom, I swear, thou thinkest over well, 
The safety of Lluellen and his men
Must be regarded highly in this match.
Say, therefore, and be short, wilt thou give peace 
And pardon to Lluellen and his men?
I will herein have time to be advised.
King Edward, no, we will admit no pause, 
For goes this wretch, this traitor, to the pot. 
And if Lluellen be pursued so near,
May chance to show thee such a tumbling cast 
As erst our father, when he thought to 'scape 
And broke his neck from Julius Caesar's tower.
My lord, these rebels all are desperate. 
And Mortimer of all most miserable.
How say you, Welshmen? Will you leave your arms
And be true liegemen unto Edward's crown?
If Edward pardon surely what is past,
Upon conditions, we are all content.
Belike you will condition with us, then?
Special conditions for our safety, first, 
And for our country Cambria's common good, 
T' avoid the fusion of our guilty blood.

First, for our followers and ourselves and all,
We ask a pardon in the prince's word.
Then, for this lord's possession in his love. 
But for our country, chief these boons we beg, 
And England's promise princely to thy Wales: 
That none be Cambria's prince to govern us 
But he that is a Welshman, born in Wales. 
Grant this and swear it on thy knightly sword, 
And have thy man, and us, and all in peace.
Why, Cambria Britons, are you so incensed?
Will you deliver me to Edward's hands?
No, Lord Lluellen, we will back for thee, 
Thy life, thy love, and golden liberty.
A truce with honorable conditions ta'en, 
Wales' happiness, England's glory, and my bane.
Command retreat be sounded in our camp.
Soldiers, I grant in full what you request.
David, good cheer. Lluellen, open the gates.
The gates are opened. Enter thee and thine.
The sweetest sun that e'er I saw to shine.
Madam, a brabble well begun for thee. 
Be thou my guest, and Sir Lluellen's love.
Mortimer, a brabble ill begun for thee.
A truce with capital conditions ta'en:
A prisoner saved and ransomed with thy life. 
Edward, my king, my lord and lover dear, 
Full little dost thou wot how this retreat, 
As with a sword, bath slain poor Mortimer. 
Farewell, the flower, the gem of beauty's blaze, 
Sweet Ellen, miracle of nature's hand.
Hell in thy name, but heaven in thy looks, 
Sweet Venus, let me saint or devil be
In that sweet heaven or hell that is in thee.

Fie, this hot weather, how it makes me sweat. 
Hey ho, my heart. Ah, I am passing faint. 
Give me my fan, that I may cool my face. 
Hold, take my mask, but see you rumple not. 
This wind and dust, see how it smolders me. 
Some drink, good Glocester, or I die for drink.
Ah, Ned, thou hast forgot thy Nell, I see, 
That she is thus inforced to follow thee.
This air's distemperature, and please your majesty,
Noisome through mountain vapors and thick mist, 
Unpleasant needs must be to you and your company, 
That never was wont to take the air
Till Flora have perfumed the earth with sweets, 
With lilies, roses, mints and eglantine.
I tell thee, the ground is all too base 
For Elinor to honor with her steps,
Whose footpace, when she progressed in the streets 
Of Aeon and the fair Jerusalem,
Was nought but costly arras points,
Fair island tapestry and azured silk,
My milk white steed treading on cloth of ray 
And trampling proudly underneath the feet
Choice of our English woollen drapery.
This climate, o'erlowering with black, congealed clouds
That take their swelling from the marish soil, 
Fraught with infectious fogs and misty damps, 
Is far unworthy to, be once embalmed
With redolence of this refreshing breath,
That sweetens where it lights, as do the flames 
And holy fires of Vesta's sacrifice.
[England for me, madam, while you are there,] 
Whose pleasant fields, new planted with the spring, 
Make Thamesis to mount above the banks
And, like a wanton, wallow up and down 
On Flora's beds and Napae's silver down.
And Wales for me, madam, while you are here,
No climate good unless your grace be near.
Would Wales had aught could please you half so well, 
Or any precious thing in Glocester's gift,
Whereof your ladyship would challenge me.
Well said, my lord. 'Tis as my mother says,
You men have learned to woo a thousand ways.
O madam, had I learned against my need, 
Of all those ways to woo, one way to speed,
My cunning then had been my fortune's guide.
Faith, Joan, I think thou must be Glocester's bride.
Good earl, how near he steps unto her side. 
So soon this eye these younglings had espied. 
I'll tell thee, girl, when I was fair and young, 
I found such honey in sweet Edward's tongue 
As I could never spend one idle walk,
But Ned and I would piece it out with talk.
So you, my lord, when you have got your Joan, 
No matter, let queen mother be alone.
Old Nell is mother now and grandmother may. 
The greenest grass doth droop and turn to hay. 
Woo on, kind clerk. Good Glocester, love thy Joan. 
Her heart is thine, her eye is not her own.
This comfort, madam, that your grace doth give
Binds me in double duty whilst I live.
Would God, King Edward see and say no less.
Glocester, I warrant thee upon my life,
My king vouchsafes his daughter for thy wife. 
Sweet Ned hath not forgot, since he did woo, 
The gall of love and all that 'longs thereto.
Why was your grace so coy to one so kind?
Kind, Glocester! So methinks, indeed! 
It seems he loves his wife no more than need 
That sends for us in all the speedy haste,
Knowing his queen to be so great with child, 
And make me leave my princely, pleasant seats 
To come into his ruder part of Wales.
His majesty hath some secret reason why 
He wishes you to move from England's pleasant courts. 
The Welshmen have of long time suitors been, 
That when the war of rebels sorts an end,
None might be prince and ruler over them
But such a one as was their countryman.
Which suit, I think his grace has granted them.
So, then, it is King Edward's policy 
To have his son, forsooth, son if it be,
A Welshman! Well, Welshman, it liketh me. 


Nay, then, I see I have my dream. I pray, let go.
You will not, will you, whether I will or no? 

Let go and be naught, I say. What ails my Nell?
Aye me, what sudden fit is this I prove?
What grief, what pinching pain, like young men's love, 
That makes me madding run thus to and fro?


Give me sweet water. Why, how hot it is.
These be the fits trouble men's wits.
Joan, ask thy beauteous mistress how she doth.


And angered worse, because I cannot right me.
I think the king comes purposely to spite me.
My fingers itch till I have had my will.
Proud Edward, calling thy "Elinor, be still." 
It will not be, nor rest I anywhere
Till I have set it soundly on his ear.
Is that the matter, then let me alone. 

Come hither, Joan. Knowest thou what ails my queen?

Nay, wench, if that be all, we'll ear it well...
What, all amort? How doth my dainty Nell? 
Look up, sweet love. Unkind. Not kiss me once? 

My lord, I think you do it for the nonce.
Sweetheart, one kiss. For God's sake, let me go.
Sweetheart, a kiss. What, whether I will or no?

No will? Take that, then, lusty lord. }

A good one, by the rood. No force, no harm.

She vaunts that mighty England hath felt her fist,
Taken a blow basely at Elinor's hand.
And vaunt she may, good leave, being cursed and coy.





Farewell, Lluellen, with thy loving Nell.
Godamercy, Mortimer. And so, farewell.
Farewell and be hanged, half Sinon's serpent brood.
Good words, Sir Rice. Wrongs have best remedy,
So taken with time, patience, and policy.



Thy Nell would follow thee and keep with thee, 
Thy Nell would feed with thee and sleep with thee.



My sweet Lluellen, though this sweet be gall,
Patience doth conquer by out-suffering all.

Lluellen, art thou flatly so resolved
To roist it out and roost so near the king?
What, shall we have a passage kept in Wales 
For men at arms, and knights adventurous? 
By cock, Sir Rice, I see no reason why 
Young Mortimer should not make one among, 
And play his part on Mannock Denny here. 
For love of his beloved Elinor.
His Elinor? And were she his, I wot
The bitter northern wind upon the plains,
The damps that rise from out the quechy plots, 
Nor influence of contagious air should touch; 
But she should court it with the proudest dames, 
Rich in attire and sumptuous in her fare, 
And take her ease in beds of safest down. 
Why, Mortimer, may not thy offers move, 
And win sweet Elinor from Lluellen's love? 
Why, pleasant gold and gentle eloquence
Have 'ticed the chastest nymphs, the fairest dames, 
And vaunts of words, delights of wealth and ease 
Have made a nun to yield. Lluellen's [band] 
Being set to see the last of desperate chance, 
Why should so fair a star stand in a vale 
And not be seen to sparkle in the sky? 
It is enough Jove change his glittering robes 
To see Mnemosyne in disguise.
Masters, have after. Gentle Robin Hood, 
You are not so well accompanied, I hope, 
But if a potter come to play his part,
You'll give him stripes or welcome, good or worse. 
Go, Mortimer, and make there love holidays. 
The king will take a common 'scuse of thee, 
Who hath more men to attend than Mortimer.


Friend copesmate, you that come late from the city,
To ask some pity of this lass so pretty,


Have no man to court your mistress but yourself. 
On my word, I'll take you down a button hole.

'Tis well, potter, you fight in a good quarrel.
Mas, this blade will hold. Let me see, then, friar.



Villains, do not touch the forbidden tree, 
Now to delude or to dishonor me.


We'll have a thrashing set among the friars, and he 
That, of these challengers, lays on slowest load, 
Be thou at hand, Rice, to gore him with thy goad.

No, Mortimer, here that eternal fire 
That burns and flames with brands of hot desire. 
Why, Mortimer, why dost thou not discover 
Thyself her knight, her liegemen, and her lover?
Lords of Albania, and my peers in France, 
Since Baliol is invested in his rights,
And wears the royal Scottish diadem,
Time is to rouse him, that the world may wot 
Scotland disdains to carry England's yoke. 
Therefore, my friends, thus put in readiness, 
Why slack we time to greet the English king
With resolute message to let him know our minds? 
Lord Versses, though thy faith and oath be ta'en 
To follow Baliol's arms for Scotland's right, 
Yet is thy heart to England's honor knit. 
Therefore, in spite of England and thyself, 
Bear thou defiance proudly to thy king. 
Tell him, Albania finds heart and hope 
To shake off England's tyranny betime, 
To rescue Scotland's honor with his sword. 
Lord Bruce, see cast about Versses' neck 
A strangling halter, that he mind his haste.
How sayest thou, Versses? Wilt thou do this message?
Although no common post, yet for my king 
I will to England, maugre England's might,
And do mine errand boldly, as becomes.
Albeit, I honor English Edward's name
And hold this slavish contemnment to scorn.		
Then hie away, as swift as swallow flies, 
And meet me on our roads on England's ground. 
See thou think of thy message and thy hest.

Welcome, sweet Edmund, to christen thy young nephew.
And welcome, Cressingham, give me thy hand. 
But, Sussex, what became of Mortimer?
We have not seen the man this many a day.
Before your highness rid from hence to Northam,
Sir Roger was a suitor to your grace
Touching fair Elinor, Lluellen's love.
And so, belike denied, with discontent
'A discontinues from your royal presence.
Why, Sussex, said we not for Elinor, 
So she would leave whom she had loved too long, 
She might have favor with my queen and me? 
But, man, her mind above her fortune mounts, 
And that's a cause she fails in her accounts. 
But go with me, my Lord of Lancaster: 
We will go see my beauteous, lovely queen 
That hath enriched me with a goodly boy.

How doth my Nell, mine own, my love, my life, 
My heart, my dear, my dove, my queen, my wife?
Ned, art thou come? Sweet Ned, welcome, my joy.
Thy Nell presents thee with a lovely boy.
Kiss him, and christen him after thine own name.

I thank your grace. Sweet Nell, well met withal.



But tell me now, lapped in lily bands, 
How with my queen, my lovely boy it stands, 
After thy journey and these childbed pains?
Sick, mine own Ned, thy Nell for thy company,
That lured her with thy lies all so far,
To follow thee unwieldy in thy war.
But I forgive thee, Ned. My limbs delight,
So thy young son thou see be bravely dight 
And in Carnarvon christened royally.
Sweet love, let him be lapped most curiously. 
He is thine own. As true as he is thine, 
Take order, then, that he be passing fine.
My lovely lady, let that care be less. 
For my young son the country will I feast, 
And have him borne as bravely to the font 
As ever yet king's son to christening went. 
Lack thou no precious thing to comfort thee, 
Dearer than England's diadem unto me.
Thanks, gentle lord. Nurse, rock the cradle, fie,
The king so near, and hear the boy to cry!
Joan, take him up and sing a lullaby.
'Tis well, believe me, wench. Godamercy, Joan.

Give me some drink. Drink nectar, my sweet Nell,
Worthy for seat in heaven with Jove to dwell.
Gramercies, Ned. Now, well remembered yet,
I have a suit, sweet lord. But you must not deny it. 

Good Ned, let Joan of Acon be his bride.
Assure yourself that they are th'roughly wooed.
God send the king be taken in the mood. 
Then, niece, 'tis like that you shall have a husband.
Come hither, Glocester. Hold. Give her thy hand.
Take her, sole daughter to the Queen of England.
For news he brought, Nell, of my young son, 
I promised him as much as I have done.


A gallant bridegroom and a princely bride.
Now say, sweet queen, what doth my lady crave?
Tell me, what name shall this young Welshman have, 
Born Prince of Wales by Cambria's full consent?
Edward, the name that doth me well content.
Then Edward of Carnarvon shall he be. 
And Prince of Wales, christened in royalty.
My lord, I think the queen would take a nap. 
Nurse, take the child and hold in your lap.
Farewell, good Joan. Be careful of my queen.
Sleep, Nell, the fairest swan mine eyes have seen.
I had forgot to ask your majesty, 
How do you with the rebels here in Wales?
As kings with rebels, Mun. Our right prevails.
We have good Robin Hood and Little John,
The Friar and the good Maid Marian.
Why, our Lluellen is a mighty man.
Trust me, my lord, methinks 'twere very good
That some good fellows went and scoured the wood, 
And take in hand to cudgel Robin Hood!
I think the Friar, for all his lusty looks,
Nor Robin, rule with their gleams and hooks, 
But would be quickly driven to the nooks.
I can assure your highness what I know, 
The false Lluellen will not run or go,
Or give an inch of ground, come man for man, 
Nor that proud rebel called Little John,
To him that wields the massiest sword of England.
Welshman, how wilt thou that we understand?
But for Lluellen, David, I deny!
England hath men will make Lluellen fly, 
Maugre his beard, and hide him in a hole, 
Weary of England's dints and manly dole.
Glocester, grow not so hot in England's right, 
That paints his honor out in every fight.
By Gis, fair lords, ere many days be past,
England shall give this robin his breakfast. 
David, be secret friend to that I say,
And if I use thy skill, thou knowest the way 
Where this proud Robin and his yeomen roam.

David, enough. As I am a gentleman, 
I'll have one merry flirt with Little John
And Robin Hood and his Maid Marian.
Be thou my counsel and my company,
And thou mayest England's resolution see.










Welcome, my lord. Hey ho, what have we there?




No, Ned, but that thy Nell doth want her will, 
Her boy should glister like the summer's sun 
In robes as rich as Jove when he triumphs. 
His pap should be of precious nectar made, 
His food, ambrosia, no earthly woman's milk, 
Sweet fires of cinnamon to open him by. 
The Graces on his cradle should attend. 
Venus should make his bed and wait on him,
And Phoebus' daughter sing him still asleep.
Thus would I have my boy used as divine,
Because he is King Edward's son and mine.
And do you mean to make him up in frieze?

Ah, Mun, my brother, dearer than my life,
How this proud honor slays my heart with grief. 
Sweet queen, how much I pity the effects.
This Spanish pride 'grees not with England's prince. 
Mild is the mind where honor builds his bower, 
And yet is earthly honor but a flower.
Fast to those looks are all my fancies tied,
Pleased with thy sweetness, angry with thy pride.
Nay, and you preach, I pray my lord, begone.
The child will cry and trouble you anon.









God save Edward of Carnarvon, Prince of Wales!


God save Edward of Carnarvon, Prince of Wales!




What tidings brings Versses to our court?
Tidings to make thee tremble, English king.
Me tremble, boy? Must not be news from Scotland
Can once make English Edward stand aghast.
Baliol has chosen at this time to stir, 
To rouse him, lionlike, and cast the yoke 
That Scots have ingloriously borne from thee 
And all the predecessors of thy line, 
And make his roads to re-obtain his right,
And, for his homage, sends thee all this despite.
Why, how now, princox, pratest thou to a king?
I do my message truly from my king. 
This sword and target chide in louder terms. 
I bring defiance from King John Baliol 
To English Edward and his barons all.
Marry, so methinks. Thou defiest me with a witness.
Baliol, my king, in Berwick makes his court. 
His camp he spreads upon the sandy plain,
And dares thee to the battle in his right.
What, court and camp in Englishmen's despite?
Hold, messenger. Commend me to thy king.
Wear thou my chain and carry this to him.
Greet all his rout of rebels, more or less.
Tell them such shameful end will hit them all, 
And wend with this as resolutely back
As thou to England brought thy Scottish braves. 
Tell, then, disdainfully Baliol from us,
We'll rouse him from his hold and make him soon 
Dislodge his camp, and take his walled town. 
Say what I bid thee, Versses, to his teeth,
And earn this favor and a better thing.
Yes, King of England, whom my heart beloves,
Think, as I promised him to brave thee here, 
So shall I bid John Baliol base from thee.
So shalt thou earn thy chain and favor, Versses,
And carry him this token that thou tendest. 
Why, now is England's harvest ripe.
Barons, now may you reap the rich renown
That under warlike colors springs in field,
And grows where ensigns wave upon the plains. 
False Baliol, Berwick is no hold of proof
To shroud thee from the strength of Edward's arm. 
No, Scot, thy treason's fear shall make the breach, 
For England's pure renown to enter on.
Amain! Amain, upon these treacherous Scots! 
Amain, say all, upon these treacherous Scots!







Wouldst thou speak with Saint Francis' receiver?


Are you Saint Francis' receiver? Jesus, Jesus!
Are you Saint Francis receiver? And how does all?


I will, of my word and honesty, friar. 


























Now Davy's days are almost come at end. 




No, Edward. I am as good a man as thyself. 





Upon them, brother! Let them not breathe.












Princes of Scotland and my loving friends, 
Whose necks are over-wearied with the yoke 
And servile bondage of these Englishmen, 
Lift up your horns and with your brazen hoofs 
Spur at the honor of your enemies.
'Tis not ambitious thoughts of private rule
Hath forced your king to take on him these arms. 

Versses by this hath told the king our minds, 
And he hath braved proud England to the proof. 
We will remunerate his resolution
With gold, with glory, and with kingly gifts.
By sweet Saint Jerem, Versses will not spare 
To tell his message to the English king
And beard the jolly Longshanks to his face, 
Were he the greatest monarch in the world.
And here he comes. His halter makes him haste.
Long live my lord, the rightful king of Scots!
Welcome, Versses. What news from England? 
Like to the measure of Scotland's king?
Versses, my lord, in terms like to himself, 
Like to the measure of Scottish king,
Defied the peers of England and their lord, 
That all his barons trembled at my threats.
And Longshanks himself, as daunted and amazed, 
Gazed on my face not witting what to say, 
Till rousing up, he shaked his threatening hair. 
"Versses," quoth he, "take thou King Edward's chain, 
Upon condition thou a message do
To Baliol: false, perjured Baliol."
For in these terms he bade me greet your grace, 
And gave this halter to your excellence.
I took the chain and give your grace the rope.
You took the chain and give my grace the rope!
Lay hold on him. Why, miscreant! Recreant! 
And darest thou bring a halter to thy king? 
But I will quite thy pain, and in that chain 
Upon a silver gallows shalt thou hang,
That, honored with a golden rope of England 
And a silver gibbet of Scotland,
Thou mayest hang in the air for fowls to feed upon 
And men to wonder at. Away with him. Away!


Then must I now present a tragedy. 

Conspire you, then, with heavens to work my harms?
O sweet assuager of our martial 'miss,
Desired death, deprive me of my life,
That I in death may end my life and love!
Glocester, thy king is partner of thy heaviness,
Although nor tongue nor eyes bewray his moan, 
For I have lost a flower as fair as thine, 
A love more dear. For Elinor is dead. 
But since the heavenly ordinance decrees 
That all things change in their prefixed time, 
Be thou content and bear it in thy breast, 
Thy swelling grief, as needs I must mine. 
Thy Joan of Acon and my queen deceased 
Shall have that honor as beseems their state. 
You peers of England, see in royal pomp 
These breathless bodies be entombed straight, 
With 'tired colors covered all with black.
Let Spanish steeds, as swift as fleeting wind, 
Convey these princes to their funeral.
Before them let a hundred mourners ride. 
In every time of their enforced abode
Rear up a cross in token of their work, 
Whereon fair Elinor's picture shall be placed. 
Arrived at London, near our palace bounds, 
Inter my lovely Elinor, late deceased,
And in remembrance of her royalty
Erect a rich and stately carved cross,
Whereon her stature shall with glory shine.
 And henceforth, see you call it Charing Cross, 
For why the chariest and the choicest queen 
That ever did delight my royal eyes
There dwell in darkness, whilst I die in grief. 
But soft, what tidings with these pursuivants?

How one affliction calls another over. 
First death torments me, and then I feel disgrace. 
Again Lluellen he rebels in Wales,
And false Baliol means to brave me, too.
But I will find provision for them all.
My constancy shall conquer death and shame. 
And, Mortimer, 'tis thou must haste to Wales
And rouse that rebel from his starting holes, 
And rid thy king of his contentious foe,
Whilst I, with Edmund, Glocester, and the rest, 
With speedy journey gather up our force
And beat these braving Scots from out our bounds. 
Courage, brave soldiers! Fates have done their worst. 
Now, virtue, let me triumph in thine aid.
Now, Joan of Acon, let me mourn thy fall.
Sole, here alone, now set thee down and sigh: 
Sigh, hapless Glocester, for thy sudden lass. 
Pale death, alas, hath banished all thy pride 
Of wedlock vows. How oft have I beheld 
Thy eyes, thy looks, thy lips and every part. 
How nature strove in them to show her art, 
In shine, in shape, in color and compare. 
But now hath death, the enemy of love,
Stained and deformed the shine, the shape, the red,
With pale and dimness, and my love is dead. 
Ah, dead my love, vile wretch why am I living? 
So willeth fate, and I must be contented.
All pomp in time must fade and grow to nothing. 
Wept I like Niobe, yet it profits nothing.
Then cease, my sighs, since I may not regain her, 
And woe to wretched death, that thus hath slain her.
Strike up that drum! Follow, pursue, and chase!
Follow, pursue! Spare not the proudest, he
That havocs England's sacred royalty!
The angry heavens frown on Britain's face, 
To eclipse the glory of fair Cambria. 
With sore aspects the dreadful planets lower. 
Lluellen, basely turn thy back and fly? No. 
Welshmen, fight it to the last and die! 
For if my men safely have got the bridge, 
Careless of chance, I'll reek no sour event. 
England's broad womb hath not that armed band 
That can expel Lluellen from his land.
Fly, Lord of Cambria! Fly, Prince of Wales! 
Sweet brother, fly! The field is won and lost: 
Thou art beset with England's furious troops,
And cursed Mortimer, like a lion, leads.
Our men have got the bridge, but all in vain. 
The Englishmen are come upon our backs. 
Either flee or die, for Edward hath the day. 
For me, I have my rescue in my hand: 
England on me no torments shall inflict. 
Farewell, Lluellen, while we meet in heaven.
Follow, pursue! Lie there, whate'er thou be. 
Lluellen is slain with a pikestaff.
Yet soft, my hearts, let us his countenance see. 
This is the Prince! I know him by his face. 
O gracious fortune, that me happy made 
To spoil the weed that chokes fair Cambria. 
Hale him from hence, and in this bushy wood 
Bury his corpse. But for his head, 
I vowed I will present our governor with the same.





Ah, sweet Lluellen, how thy death I rue.
Well said, friar. Better once than never.



Now, trothless king, what fruits have braving boasts?
What end bath treason but a sudden fall? 
Such as have known thy life and bringing up 
Have praised thee for thy learning and thy art. 
How comes it then that thou forget'st thy books, 
That schooled thee to forget ingratitude? Unkind. 
This hand hath 'nointed thee a king. 
This tongue pronounced the sentence of thy ruth. 
If thou, in lieu of mine unfeigned love
Hast levied arms for to attempt my crown, 
Now see thy fruits. Thy glories are dispersed, 
And heifer-like, sith thou hast passed thy bounds, 
Thy sturdy neck must stoop to bear this yoke.
I took this lesson, Edward, from my book: 
To keep a just equality of mind,
Content with every fortune as it comes.
So canst thou threat no more than I expect.
So, sir, your moderation is enforced. 
Your goodly glosses cannot make it good.
Then will I keep in silence what I mean, 
Since Edward thinks my meaning is not good.
Nay, Baliol, speak forth, if there yet remain
A little remnant of persuading art.
If cunning have power to win the king, 
Let those employ it that can flatter him. 
If honored deed may reconcile the king, 
It lies in me to give and him to take.
Why, what remains for Baliol now to give?
Allegiance, as becomes a royal king.
What league of faith where league is broken once?
The greater hope in them that once have fallen.
But foolish are those monarchs that do yield
A conquered realm upon submissive vows.
There. Take my crown, and so redeem my life.
Aye, sir, that was the choicest plea of both.
For whoso quells the pomp of haughty minds,
And breaks their staff whereon they build their trust, 
Is sure, in wanting power they carry no harm. 
Baliol shall live, but yet within such bounds 
That if his wings grow fledge, they may be clipped.
Honor and fortune wait upon the crown 
Of princely Edward, England's valiant king.
Thanks, messenger. And if my God vouchsafe
That winged honor wait upon my throne,
I'll make her spread her plumes upon their heads 
Whose true allegiance doth confirm the crown.
What news in Wales? How wends our business there?
The false disturber of that wasted soil, 
With his adherents, is surprised, my king.
And in assurance he shall start no more.
Breathless he lies, and headless too, my lords. 
The circumstance these lines shall here unfold.
A harmful weed, by wisdom rooted out, 
Can never hurt the true engrafted plant.
<DBETVS.TXT>
Of Israel's sweetest singer now I sing,
His holy style and happy victories;
Whose Muse was dipped in that inspiring dew
Arch-angels stilled from the breath of Jove,
Decking her temples with the glorious flowers
Heavens rained on tops of Sion and Mount Sinai.
Upon the bosom of his ivory lute
The cherubins and angels laid their breasts;
And, when his consecrated fingers struck
The golden wires of his ravishing harp,
He gave alarum to the host of heaven,
That, winged with lightning, brake the clouds, and cast
Their crystal armor at his conquering feet.
Of this sweet poet, Jove's musician,
And of his beauteous son, I press to sing.
Then help, divine Adonai, to conduct
Upon the wings of my well-tempered verse
The hearers' minds above the towers of heaven,
And guide them so in this thrice-haughty flight,
Their mounting feathers scorch not with the fire
That none can temper but thy holy hand:
To thee for succor flies my feeble Muse,
And at thy feet her iron pen doth use.
Hot sun, cool fire, tempered with sweet air,
Black shade, fair nurse, shadow my white hair:
Shine, sun; burn, fire; breathe, air, and ease me;
Black shade, fair nurse, shroud me, and please me:
Shadow, my sweet nurse, keep me from burning,
Make not my glad cause cause of [my] mourning.

Come, gentle Zephyr, tricked with those perfumes
That erst in Eden sweetened Adam's love,
And stroke my bosom with thy silken fan:
This shade, sun-proof, is yet no proof for thee;
Thy body, smoother than this waveless spring,
And purer than the substance of the same,
Can creep through that his lances cannot pierce:
Thou, and thy sister, soft and sacred Air,
Goddess of life, and governess of health,
Keep every fountain fresh and arbor sweet;
No brazen gate her passage can repulse,
Nor bushy thicket bar thy subtle breath:
Then deck thee with thy loose delightsome robes,
And on thy wings bring delicate perfumes,
To play the wanton with us through the leaves.
What tunes, what words, what looks, what wonders pierce
My soul, incensed with a sudden fire?
What tree, what shade, what spring, what paradise,
Enjoys the beauty of so fair a dame?
Fair Eva, placed in perfect happiness,
Lending her praise-notes to the liberal heavens,
Struck with the accents of arch-angels' tunes,
Wrought not more pleasure to her husband's thoughts
Than this fair woman's words and notes to mine.
May that sweet plain that bears her pleasant weight
Be still enamelled with discolored flowers;
That precious fount bear sand of purest gold;
And, for the pebble, let the silver streams
That pierce earth's bowels to maintain the source,
Play upon rubies, sapphires, chrysolites;
The brims let be embraced with golden curls
Of moss that sleeps with sound the waters make
For joy to feed the fount with their recourse;
Let all the grass that beautifies her bower
Bear manna every morn instead of dew,
Or let the dew be sweeter far than that
That hangs, like chains of pearl, on Hermon hill,
Or balm which trickled from old Aaron's beard.--
Cusay, come up, and serve thy lord the king.
What service doth my lord the king command?
See;Cusay, see the flower of Israel,
The fairest daughter that obeys the king
In all the land the Lord subdued to me;
Fairer than Isaac's lover at the well,
Brighter than inside-bark of new-hewn cedar,
Sweeter than flames of fine-perfumed myrrh,
And comelier than the silver clouds that dance
On Zephyr's wings before the King of Heaven.
Is it not Bethsabe the Hethite's wife,
Urias, now at Rabbah siege with Joab?
Go know, and bring her quickly to the king;
Tell her, her graces have found grace with him.
 
Bright Bethsabe shall wash, in David's bower,
In water mixed with purest almond-flower,
And bathe her beauty in the milk of kids:
Bright Bethsabe gives earth to my desires;
Verdure to earth; and to that verdure flowers;
To flowers sweet odors; and to odors wings
That carry pleasures to the hearts of kings.
Fair Bethsabe, the King of Israel
From forth his princely tower hath seen thee bathe;
And thy sweet graces have found grace with him:
Come, then, and kneel unto him where he stands;
The king is gracious, and hath liberal hands.
Ah, what is Bethsabe to please the king?
Or what is David, that he should desire,
For fickle beauty's sake, his servant's wife?
David, thou know'st, fair dame, is wise and just,
Elected to the heart of Israel's God;
Then do not thou expostulate with him
For any action that contents his soul.
My lord the king, elect to God's own heart,
Should not his gracious jealousy incense
Whose thoughts are chaste: I hate incontinence.
Woman, thou wrong'st the king, and doubt'st his honor
Whose truth maintains the crown of Israel,
Making him stay that bade me bring thee straight.
The king's poor handmaid will obey my lord.
Then come, and do thy duty to his grace;
And do what seemeth favor in his sight.
Now comes my lover tripping like the roe,
And brings my longings tangled in her hair.
To joy her love I'll build a kingly bower,
Seated in hearing of a hundred streams,
That, for their homage to her sovereign joys,
Shall, as the serpents fold into their nests
In oblique turnings, wind their nimble waves
About the circles of her curious walks;
And with their murmur summon easeful sleep
To lay his golden sceptre on her brows.--
Open the doors, and entertain my love;
Open, I say, and, as you open, sing,
Welcome, fair Bethsabe, King David's darling.
Welcome, fair Bethsabe, King David's darling.
Thy bones' fair covering, erst discovered fair,
And all mine eyes' with all thy beauties pierced:
As heaven's bright eye burns most when most he climbs
The crooked zodiac with his fiery sphere,
And shineth furthest from this earthly globe;
So, since thy beauty scorched my conquered soul,
I called thee nearer for my nearer cure.
Too near, my lord, was your unarmed heart
When furthest off my hapless beauty pierced;
And would this dreary day had turned to night,
Or that some pitchy cloud had cloaked the sun,
Before their lights had caused my lord to see
His name disparaged and my chastity!
My love, if want of love have left thy soul
A sharper sense of honor than thy king,
(For love leads princes sometimes from their seats,)
As erst my heart was hurt, displeasing thee,
So come and taste thy ease with easing me.
One medicine cannot heal our different harms;
But rather make both rankle at the bone:
Then let the king be cunning in his cure,
Lest flattering both, both perish in his hand.
Leave it to me, my dearest Bethsabe,
Whose skill is conversant in deeper cures.--
And, Cusay, haste thou to my servant Joab,
Commanding him to send Urias home
With all the speed can possibly be used.
Cusay will fly about the king's desire. 
Courage, ye mighty men of Israel,
And charge your fatal instruments of war
Upon the bosoms of proud Ammon's sons,
That have disguised your king's ambassadors,
Cut half their beards and half their garments off,
In spite of Israel and his daughters' sons!
Ye fight the holy battles of Jehovah,
King David's God, and ours, and Jacob's God,
That guides your weapons to their conquering strokes,
Orders your footsteps, and directs your thoughts
To stratagems that harbor victory:
He casts his sacred eyesight from on high,
And sees your foes run seeking for their deaths,
Laughing their labors and their hopes to scorn; 
While 'twixt your bodies and their blunted swords
He puts on armor of his honor's proof,
And makes their weapons wound the senseless winds.
Before this city Rabbah we will lie,
And shoot forth shafts as thick and dangerous
As was the hail that Moses mixed with fire,
And threw with fury round about the fields,
Devouring Pharaoh's friends and Egypt's fruits,
First, mighty captains, Joab and Abisai,
Let us assault, and scale this kingly tower,
Where all their conduits and their fountains are;
Then we may easily take the city too.
Well hath Urias counselled our attempts;
And as he spake us, so assault the tower:
Let Hanon now, the king of Ammon's sons,
Repulse our conquering passage if he dare.
What would the shepherd's-dogs of Israel
Snatch from the mighty issue of King Ammon,
The valiant Ammonites and haughty Syrians?
'Tis not your late successive victories
Can make us yield, or quail our courages;
But if ye dare assay to scale this tower,
Our angry swords shall smite ye to the ground,
And venge our losses on your hateful lives.
Hanon, thy father Nahas gave relief
To holy David in his hapless exile,
Lived his fixed date, and died in peace:
But thou, instead of reaping his reward,
Hast trod it under foot, and scorned our king;
Therefore thy days shall end with violence,
And to our swords thy vital blood shall cleave.
Hence, thou that bear'st poor Israel's shepherd's-hook,
The proud lieutenant of that base-born king,
And keep within the compass of his fold;
For, if ye seek to feed on Ammon's fruits,
And stray into the Syrians' fruitful meads,
The mastives of our land shall worry ye,
And pull the weasels from your greedy throats.
Who can endure these pagans' blasphemies?
My soul repines at this disparagement.
Assault, ye valiant men of David's host,
And beat these railing dastards from their doors.
Thus have we won the tower, which we will keep,
Maugre the sons of Ammon and of Syria,
Where is Lord Joab, leader of the host?
Here is Lord Joab, leader of the host.
Cusay, come up, for we have won the hold.
In happy hour, then, is Cusay come.
What news, then, brings Lord Cusay from the king?
His majesty commands thee out of hand
To send him home Urias from the wars,
For matter of some service he should do.
'Tis for no choler hath surprised the king,
I hope, Lord Cusay, 'gainst his servant's truth?
No; rather to prefer Urias' truth.
Here, take him with thee, then, and go in peace;
And tell my lord the king that I have fought
Against the city Rabbah with success,
And scaled where the royal palace is,
The conduit-heads and all their sweetest springs:
Then let him come in person to these walls,
With all the soldiers he can bring besides,
And take the city as his own exploit,
Lest I surprise it, and the people give
The glory of the conquest to my name.
We will, Lord Joab; and great Israel's God
Bless in thy hands the battles of our king!
Farewell, Urias; haste away the king.
As sure as Joab breathes a victor here,
Urias will haste him and his own return.
Let us descend, and ope the palace' gate,
Taking our soldiers in to keep the hold.
Let us, Abisai:--and, ye sons of Judah,
Be valiant, and maintain your victory. 
What means my lord, the king's beloved son,
That wears upon his right triumphant arm
The power of Israel for a royal favor,
That holds upon the tables of his hands
Banquets of honor and all thought's content,
To suffer pale and grisly abstinence
To sit and feed upon his fainting cheeks,
And suck away the blood that cheers his looks?
Ah, Jonadab, it is my sister's looks,
On whose sweet beauty I bestow my blood,
That make me look so amorously lean;
Her beauty having seized upon my heart,
So merely consecrate to her content,
Sets now such guard about his vital blood,
And views the passage with such piercing eyes,
That none can scape to cheer my pining cheeks,
But all is thought too little for her love.
Then from her heart thy looks shall be relieved,
And thou shalt joy her as thy soul desires.
How can it be, my sweet friend Jonadab,
Since Thamar is a virgin and my sister?
Thus it shall be: lie down upon thy bed,
Feigning thee fever-sick and ill-at-ease;
And when the king shall come to visit thee,
Desire thy sister Thamar may be sent
To dress some dainties for thy malady:
Then when thou hast her solely with thyself,
Enforce some favor to thy manly love.
See where she comes: entreat her in with thee.
What aileth Amnon, with such sickly looks
To daunt the favor of his lovely face?
Sweet Thamar, sick, and wish some wholesome cates
Dressed with the cunning of thy dainty hands.
That hath the king commanded at my hands:
Then come and rest thee, while I make thee ready
Some dainties easeful to thy crazed soul.
I go, sweet sister, eased with thy sight.
Why should a prince, whose power may command,
Obey the rebel passions of his love,
When they contend but 'gainst his conscience,
And may be governed or suppressed by will?
Now, Amnon, loose those loving knots of blood,
That sucked the courage from thy kingly heart,
And give it passage to thy withered cheeks.
Now, Thamar, ripened are the holy fruits
That grew on plants of thy virginity;
And rotten is thy name in Israel:
Poor Thamar, little did thy lovely hands
Foretell an action of such violence
As to contend with Amnon's lusty arms
Sinewed with vigor of his kindless love:
Fair Thamar, now dishonor hunts thy foot,
And follows thee through every covert shade,
Discovering thy shame and nakedness,
Even from the valleys of Jehosaphat
Up to the lofty mounts of Lebanon;
Where cedars, stirred with anger of the winds,
Sounding in storms the tale of thy disgrace,
Tremble with fury, and with murmur shake
Earth with their feet and with their heads the heavens,
Beating the clouds into their swiftest rack,
To bear this wonder round about the world. 
Hence from my bed, whose sight offends my soul
As doth the parbreak of disgorged bears!
Unkind, unprincely, and unmanly Amnon,
To force, and then refuse thy sister's love,
Adding unto the fright of thy offense
The baneful torment of my published shame!
O, do not this dishonor to thy love,
Nor clog thy soul with such increasing sin!
This second evil far exceeds the first.
Jethray, come thrust this woman from my sight,
And bolt the door upon her if she strive. 
Go, madam, go; away; you must be gone;
My lord hath done with you: I pray, depart.
Whither, alas, ah, whither shall I fly,
With folded arms and all-amazed soul?
Cast as was Eva from that glorious soil,
(Where all delights sat bating, winged with thoughts,
Ready to nestle in her naked breasts,)
To bare and barren vales with floods made waste,
To desert woods, and hills with lightning scorched,
With death, with shame, with hell, with horror sit;
There will I wander from my father's face;
There Absalon, my brother Absalon,
Sweet Absalon shall hear his sister mourn;
There will I lure with my windy sighs
Night-ravens and owls to rend my bloody side,
Which with a rusty weapon I will wound,
And make them passage to my panting heart.
Why talk'st thou, wretch, and leavest the deed undone?
Rend hair and garments, as thy heart is rent
With inward fury of a thousand griefs,
And scatter them by these unhallowed doors,
To figure Amnon's resting cruelty,
And tragic spoil of Thamar's chastity.
What causeth Thamar to exclaim so much?
The cause that Thamar shameth to disclose.
Say; I thy brother will revenge that cause.
Amnon, our father's son, hath forced me,
And thrusts me from him as the scorn of Israel.
Hath Amnon forced thee? by David's hand,
And by the covenant God hath made with him,
Amnon shall bear his violence to hell;
Traitor to heaven, traitor to David's throne,
Traitor to Absalon and Israel.
This fact hath Jacob's ruler seen from heaven,
And through a cloud of smoke and tower of fire,
As he rides vaunting him upon the greens,
Shall tear his chariot-wheels with violent winds,
And throw his body in the bloody sea;
At him the thunder shall discharge his bolt;
And his fair spouse, with bright and fiery wings,
Sit ever burning on his hateful bones:
Myself, as swift as thunder or his spouse,
Will hunt occasion with a secret hate,
To work false Amnon an ungracious end.--
Go in, my sister; rest thee in my house;
And God in time shall take this shame from thee.
Nor God nor time will do that good for me. 
My Absalon, what mak'st thou here alone,
And bear'st such discontentment in thy brows?
Great cause hath Absalon to be displeased,
And in his heart to shroud the wounds of wrath.
'Gainst whom should Absalon be thus displeased?
'Gainst wicked Amnon, thy ungracious son,
My brother and fair Thamar's by the king,
My step-brother by mother and by kind:
He hath dishonored David's holiness,
And fixed a blot of lightness on his throne,
Forcing my sister Thamar when he feigned
A sickness, sprung from root of heinous lust.
Hath Amnon brought this evil on my house,
And suffered sin to smite his father's bones?
Smite, David, deadlier than the voice of heaven,
And let hate's fire be kindled in thy heart:
Frame in the arches of thy angry brows,
Making thy forehead, like a comet, shine,
To force false Amnon tremble at thy looks.
Sin, with his sevenfold crown and purple robe,
Begins his triumphs in my guilty throne;
There sits he watching with his hundred eyes
Our idle minutes and our wanton thoughts;
And with his baits, made of our frail desires,
Gives us the hook that hales our souls to hell:
But with the spirit of my kingdom's God
I'll thrust the flattering tyrant from his throne,
And scourge his bondslaves from my hallowed court
With rods of iron and thorns of sharpened steel.
Then, Absalon, revenge not thou this sin;
Leave it to me, and I will chasten him.
I am content: then grant, my lord the king,
Himself with all his other lords would come
Up to my sheep-feast on the plain of Hazor.
Nay, my fair son, myself with all my lords
Will bring thee too much charge; yet some shall go.
But let my lord the king himself take pains;
The time of year is pleasant for your grace,
And gladsome summer in her shady robes,
Crowned with roses and with painted flowers,
With all her nymphs, shall entertain my lord,
That, from the thicket of my verdant groves,
Will sprinkle honey-dews about his breast,
And cast sweet balm upon his kingly head:
Then grant thy servant's boon, and go, my lord.
Let it content my sweet son Absalon,
That I may stay, and take my other lords.
But shall thy best-beloved Amnon go?
What needeth it, that Amnon go with thee?
Yet do thy son and servant so much grace.
Amnon shall go, and all my other lords,
Because I will give grace to Absalon.
Pleaseth my lord the king, his servant Joab
Hath sent Urias from the Syrian wars.
Welcome, Urias, from the Syrian wars,
Welcome to David as his dearest lord.
Thanks be to Israel's God and David's grace,
Urias finds such greeting with the king.
No other greeting shall Urias find
As long as David sways th' elected seat
And consecrated throne of Israel.
Tell me, Urias, of my servant Joab;
Fights he with truth the battles of our God,
And for the honor of the Lord's anointed?
Thy servant Joab fights the chosen wars
With truth, with honor, and with high success,
And, 'gainst the wicked king of Ammon's sons,
Hath, by the finger of our sovereign's God,
Besieged the city Rabbah, and achieved
The court of waters, where the conduits run, 
Therefore he willeth David's mightiness
Should number out the host of Israel,
And come in person to the city Rabbah,
That so her conquest may be made the king's,
And Joab fight as his inferior.
This hath not God and Joab's prowess done
Without Urias' valor, I am sure,
Who since his true conversion from a Hethite
To an adopted son of Israel,
Hath fought like one whose arms were lift by heaven,
And whose bright sword was edged with Israel's wrath.
Go, therefore, home, Urias, take thy rest;
Visit thy wife and household with the joys
A victor and a favorite of the king's
Should exercise with honor after arms.
Thy servant's bones are yet not half so crazed,
Nor constitute on such a sickly mould,
That for so little service he should faint,
And seek, as cowards, refuge of his home:
Nor are his thoughts so sensually stirred, 
To stay the arms with which the Lord would smite
And fill their circle with his conquered foes,
For wanton bosom of a flattering wife.
Urias hath a beauteous sober wife,
Yet young, and framed of tempting flesh and blood;
Then, when the king hath summoned thee from arms,
If thou unkindly shouldst refrain her bed,
Sin might be laid upon Urias' soul,
If Bethsabe by frailty hurt her fame:
Then go, Urias, solace in her love;
Whom God hath knit to thee, tremble to loose.
The king is much too tender of my ease:
The ark and Israel and Judah dwell
In palaces and rich pavilions;

Suffering the wrath of winter and the sun:
And shall Urias (of more shame than they)
Banquet, and loiter in the work of heaven?

Mine ears shall never lean to such delight,
When holy labor calls me forth to fight.
Then be it with Urias' manly heart
As best his fame may shine in Israel.
Thus shall Urias' heart be best content,
Till thou dismiss me back to Joab's bands:
This ground before the king my master's doors
Shall be my couch, and this unwearied arm
The proper pillow of a soldier's head;
For never will I lodge within my house,
Till Joab triumph in my secret vows.
Then fetch some flagons of our purest wine,
That we may welcome home our hardy friend
With full carouses to his fortunes past
And to the honors of his future arms;
Then will I send him back to Rabbah siege,
And follow with the strength of Israel.
Arise, Urias; come and pledge the king.
If David think me worthy such a grace,
I will be bold and pledge my lord the king.
Absalon and Cusay both shall drink
To good Urias and his happiness.
We will, my lord, to please Urias' soul.
I will begin, Urias, to thyself,
And all the treasure of the Ammonites,
Which here I promise to impart to thee,
And bind that promise with a full carouse. 
What seemeth pleasant in my sovereign's eyes,
That shall Urias do till he be dead.
Fill him the cup. --Follow, ye lords that love
Your sovereign's health, and do as he hath done.
Ill may he thrive, or live in Israel,
That loves not David, or denies his charge.--
Urias here is to Abisai's health,
Lord Joab's brother and thy loving friend. 
I pledge Lord Absalon and Abisai's health. 
Here now, Urias, to the health of Joab,
And to the pleasant journey we shall have
When we return to mighty Rabbah siege. 
Cusay, I pledge thee all with all my heart.--
Give me some drink, ye servants of the king;
 
Well done, my good Urias I drink thy fill,
That in thy fullness David may rejoice.

Now, Lord Urias, one carouse to me.
No, sir, I'll drink to the king;
Your father is a better man than you.
Do so, Urias; I will pledge thee straight,
I will indeed, my lord and sovereign;
I'll once in my days be so bold.  Fill him his glass.

I pledge thee, good Urias, presently.
Here, then, Urias, once again for me,
And to the health of David's children.

Ay, David's children: wilt thou pledge me, man?

Pledge me, I say, or else thou lov'st us not.

Rather, Urias, go thou home and sleep.

If naught will serve to save his wife's renown,
I'll send him with a letter unto Joab
To put him in the forefront of the wars,
That so my purposes may take effect.--
  
Come, rise, Urias; get thee in and sleep.
I will not go home, sir; that's flat.
Then come and rest thee upon David's bed.
On, afore, my lords, on, afore. 
O proud revolt of a presumptuous man,
Laying his bridle in the neck of sin,
Ready to bear him past his grave to hell!
Like as the fatal raven, that in his voice
Carries the dreadful summons of our deaths,
Flies by the fair Arabian spiceries,
Her pleasant gardens and delightsome parks,
Seeming to curse them with his hoarse exclaims,
And yet doth stoop with hungry violence
Upon a piece of hateful carrion;
So wretched man, displeased with those delights
Would yield a quickening savor to his soul,
Pursues with eager and unstanched thirst
The greedy longings of his loathsome flesh
If holy David so shook hands with sin,
What shall our baser spirits glory in?

Pursues the sequel with a greater ill.
Urias in the forefront of the wars
Is murdered by the hateful heathens' sword,
And David joys his too dear Bethsabe.
Suppose this past, and that the child is born,
Whose death the prophet solemnly doth mourn;
Mourn, Bethsabe, bewail thy foolishness,
Thy sin, thy shame, the sorrow of thy soul:
Sin, shame, and sorrow swarm about thy soul;
And, in the gates and entrance of my heart,
Sadness, with wreathed arms, hangs her complaint.
No comfort from the ten-stringed instrument,
The tinkling cymbal, or the ivory lute;
Nor doth the sound of David's kingly harp
Make glad the broken heart of Bethsabe:
Jerusalem is filled with thy complaint,
And in the streets of Sion sits thy grief.
The babe is sick, sick to the death, I fear,
The fruit that sprung from thee to David's house;
Nor may the pot of honey and of oil
Glad David or his handmaid's countenance.
Urias--woe is me to think hereon!
For who is it among the sons of men
That saith not to my soul, "The king hath sinned;
David hath done amiss, and Bethsabe
Laid snares of death unto Urias' life"?
My sweet Urias, fall'n into the pit
Art thou, and gone even to the gates of hell
For Bethsabe, that wouldst not shroud her shame.
O, what is it to serve the lust of kings! 
How lion-like th[e]y rage when we resist!
But, Bethsabe, in humbleness attend
The grace that God will to his handmaid send. 
The babe is sick, and sad is David's heart,
To see the guiltless bear the guilty's pain.
David, hang up thy harp; hang down thy head;
And dash thy ivory lute against the stones.
The dew, that on the hill of Hermon falls,
Rains not on Sion's tops and lofty towers;
The plains of Gath and Askaron rejoice,
And David's thoughts are spent in pensiveness:
The babe is sick, sweet babe, that Bethsabe
With woman's pain brought forth to Israel.
But what saith Nathan to his lord the king?
Thus Nathan saith unto his lord the king.
There were two men both dwellers in one town:
The one was mighty, and exceeding rich
In oxen, sheep, and cattle of the field;
The other poor, having nor ox, nor calf,
Nor other cattle, save one little lamb
Which he had bought and nourished by the hand;
And it grew up, and fed with him and his,
And eat and drank as he and his were wont,
And in his bosom slept, and was to him
As was his daughter or his dearest child.
There came a stranger to this wealthy man;
And he refused and spared to take his own,
Or of his store to dress or make him meat,

And dressed it for this stranger in his house.
What, tell me, shall be done to him for this?
Now, as the Lord doth live, this wicked man
Is judged and shall become the child of death;
Fourfold to the poor man shall he restore,
That without mercy took his lamb away.
Thou art the man; and thou hast judged thyself.
David, thus saith the Lord thy God by me:
I thee anointed king in Israel,
And saved thee from the tyranny of Saul;
Thy master's house I gave thee to possess;
His wives into thy bosom did I give
And Judah and Jerusalem withal;
And might, thou know'st, if this had been too small

Wherefore, then, hast thou gone so far astray,
And hast done evil, and sinned in my sight?
Urias thou hast killed with the sword;
Yea, with the sword of the uncircumcised
Thou hast him slain: wherefore, from this day forth,
The sword shall never go from thee and thine;
For thou hast ta'en this Hethite's wife to thee:
Wherefore, behold, I will, saith Jacob's God,
In thine own house stir evil up to thee;
Yea, I before thy face will take thy wives,
And give them to thy neighbor to possess:
This shall be done to David in the day,
That Israel openly may see thy shame,
Nathan, I have against the Lord, I have
Sinned; O, sinned grievously I and, lo,
From heaven's throne doth David throw himself,
And groan and grovel to the gates of hell! 
David, stand up: thus saith the Lord by me:
David the king shall live, for he hath seen
The true repentant sorrow of thy heart;
But, for thou hast in this misdeed of thine
Stirred up the enemies of Israel
To triumph, and blaspheme the God of Hosts
And say, he set a wicked man to reign
Over his loved people and his tribes,--
The child shall surely die that erst was born,
His mother's sin, his kingly father's scorn.
How just is Jacob's God in all his works!
But must it die that David loveth so?
O, that the Mighty One of Israel
Nill change his doom, and says the babe must die!
Mourn, Israel, and weep in Sion-gates;
Wither, ye cedar-trees of Lebanon;
Ye sprouting almonds, with your flowering tops,
Droop, drown, and drench in Hebron's fearful streams:
The babe must die that was to David born,
His mother's sin, his kingly father's scorn. 
What tidings bringeth Cusay to the king
To thee, the servant of King David's court,
This bringeth Cusay, as the prophet spake;
The Lord hath surely stricken to the death
The child new-born by that Urias' wife,
That by the sons of Ammon erst was slain.
Cusay, be still; the king is vexed sore:
How shall he speed that brings this tidings first,
When, while the child was yet alive, we spake,
And David's heart would not be comforted?
Yea, David's heart will not be comforted!
What murmur ye, the servants of the king?
What tidings telleth Cusay to the king?
Say, Cusay, lives the child, or is he dead?
The child is dead, that of Urias' wife
David begot.  Urias' wife; sayest thou?
The child is dead, then ceaseth David's shame:
Fetch me to eat, and give me wine to drink;
Water to wash, and oil to clear my looks;
Bring down your shalms, your cymbals, and your pipes;
Let David's harp and lute, his hand and voice,
Give laud to him that loveth Israel,
And sing his praise that shendeth David's fame
That put away his sin from out his sight,
And sent his shame into the streets of Gath.
Bring ye to me the mother of the babe,
That I may wipe the tears from off her face,
And give her comfort with this hand of mine,
And deck fair Bethsabe with ornaments,
That she may bear to me another son,
That may be loved of the Lord of Hosts;
For where he is, of force must David go,
But never may he come where David is.
Fair Bethsabe, sit thou, and sigh no more:--
And sing and play, you servants of the king:
Now sleepeth David's sorrow with the dead,
And Bethsabe liveth to Israel.
Now arms and warlike engines for assault
Prepare at once, ye men of Israel,
Ye men of Judah and Jerusalem,
That Rabbah may be taken by the king,
Lest it be called after Joab's name,
Nor David's glory shine in Sion streets.
To Rabbah marcheth David with his men,
To chastise Ammon and the wicked ones. 
Set up your mules, and give them well to eat,
And let us meet our brothers at the feast.
Accursed is the master of this feast,
Dishonor of the house of Israel,
His sister's slander, and his mother's shame:
Shame be his share that could such ill contrive,
To ravish Thamar, and, without a pause,
To drive her shamefully from out his house:
But may his wickedness find just reward!
Therefore doth Absalon conspire with you,
That Amnon die what time he sits to eat;
For in the holy temple have I sworn
Wreak of his villainy in Thamar's rape.
And here he comes: bespeak him gently, all,
Whose death is deeply graved in my heart.
Our shearers are not far from hence, I wot;
And Amnon to you all his brethren
Giveth such welcome as our fathers erst
Were wont in Judah and Jerusalem;--
But, specially, Lord Absalon, to thee,
The honor of thy house and progeny:
Sir down and dine with me, King David's son,
Thou fair young man, whose hairs shine in mine eye
Like golden wires of David's ivory lute.
Amnon, where be thy shearers and thy men,
That we may pour-in plenty of thy wines,
And eat thy goats'-milk, and rejoice with thee?
Here cometh Amnon's shearers and his men:--
Absalon, sit and rejoice with me.
Drink, Absalon, in praise of Israel;
Welcome to Amnon's fields from David's court.
Die with thy draught; perish, and die accursed;
Dishonor to the honor of us all;
Die for the villainy to Thamar done,
Unworthy thou to be King David's son! 
O, what hath Absalon for Thamar done,
Murdered his brother, great King David's son!
Run, Jonadab, away, and make it known,
What cruelty this Absalon hath shown.
Amnon, thy brother Adonia shall
Bury thy body 'mong the dead men's bones;
And we will make complaint to Israel
Of Amnon's death and pride of Absalon.
This is the town of the uncircumcised,
The city of the kingdom, this is it,
Rabbah, where wicked Hanon sitteth king.
Despoil this king, this Hanon of his crown;
Unpeople Rabbah and the streets thereof;
For in their blood, and slaughter of the slain,
Lieth the honor of King David's line.
Joab, Abisai, and the rest of you,
Fight ye this day for great Jerusalem.
And see where Hanon shows him on the walls;
Why, then, do we forbear to give assault,
That Israel may, as it is promised,
Subdue the daughters of the Gentiles' tribes?
All this must be performed by David's hand.
Hark to me, Hanon, and remember well:
As sure as He doth live that kept my host,
What time our young men, by the pool of Gibeon,
Went forth against the strength of Isboseth,
And twelve to twelve did with their weapons play;
So sure art thou and thy men of war
To feel the sword of Israel this day,
Because thou hast defied Jacob's God,
And suffered Rabbah with the Philistine
To rail upon the tribe of Benjamin.
Hark, man: as sure as Saul thy master fell,
And gored his sides upon the mountain-tops,
And Jonathan, Abinadab, and Melchisua,
Watered the dales and deeps of Askaron
With bloody streams, that from Gilboa ran
In channels through the wilderness of Ziph,
What time the sword of the uncircumcised
Was drunken with the blood of Israel;
So sure shall David perish with his men
Under the walls of Rabbah, Hanon's town,
Hanon, the God of Israel hath said,
David the king shall wear that crown of thine
That weighs a talent of the finest gold,
And triumph in the spoil of Hanon's town,
When Israel shall hale thy people hence,
And turn them to the tile-kiln, man and child,
And put them under harrows made of iron,
And hew their bones with axes, and their limbs
With iron swords divide and tear in twain.
Hanon, this shall be done to thee and thine,
Because thou hast defied Israel.--
To arms, to arms, that Rabbah feel revenge,
And Hanon's town become King David's spoil!
Now clattering arms and wrathful storms of war
Have thundered over Rabbah's razed towers;
The wreakful ire of great Jehovah's arm,
That for his people made the gates to rend,
And clothed the cherubins in fiery coats
To fight against the wicked Hanon's town.
Pay thanks, ye men of Judah, to the King,
The God of Sion and Jerusalem,
That hath exalted Israel to this,
And crowned David with this diadem.
Beauteous and bright is he among the tribes;
As when the sun, attired in glistering robe,
Comes dancing from his oriental gate,
And bridegroomlike hurls through the gloomy air
His radiant beams, such doth King David show,
Crowned with the honor of his enemies' town,
Shining in riches like the firmament,
The starry vault that overhangs the earth:
So looketh David King of Israel.
Joab, why doth not David mount his throne
Whom heaven hath beautified with Hanon's crown?
Sound trumpets, shalms, and instruments of praise,
To Jacob's God for David's victory.
Why doth the King of Israel rejoice?
Why sitteth David crowned with Rabbah's rule?
Behold, there hath great heaviness befall'n
In Amnon's fields by Absalon's misdeed;
And Amnon's shearers and their feast of mirth
Absalon hath o'erturned with his sword;
Nor liveth any of King David's sons
To bring this bitter tidings to the king.
Ay me, how soon are David's triumphs dashed,
How suddenly declineth David's pride!
As doth the daylight settle in the west,
So dim is David's glory and his gite.
Die, David; for to thee is left no seed
That may revive thy name in Israel.
In Israel is left of David's seed.
Comfort your lord, you servants of the king.--
Behold, thy sons return in mourning weeds,
And only Amnon Absalon hath slain.
Welcome, my sons; dearer to me you are
Than is this golden crown or Hanon's spoil.
O, tell me, then, tell me, my sons, I say,
How cometh it to pass that Absalon
Hath slain his brother Amnon with the sword?
Thy sons, O king, went up to Amnon's fields,
To feast with him and eat his bread and oil;
And Absalon upon his mule doth come,
And to his men he saith, "When Amnon's heart
Is merry and secure, then strike him dead,
Because he forced Thamar shamefully, 
And hated her, and threw her forth his doors."
And this did he; and they with him conspire,
And kill thy son in wreak of Thamar's wrong.
How long shall Judah and Jerusalem
Complain, and water Sion with their tears!
How long shall Israel lament in vain,
And not a man among the mighty ones
Will hear the sorrows of King David's heart!
Amnon, thy life was pleasing to thy lord,
As to mine ears the music of my lute,
Or songs that David tuneth to his harp;
And Absalon hath ta'en from me away
The gladness of my sad distressed soul.
God save King David, King of Israel,
And bless the gates of Sion for his sake!
Woman, why mournest thou? rise from the earth;
Tell me what sorrow hath befall'n thy soul.
Thy servant's soul, O king, is troubled sore,
And grievous is the anguish of her heart;
And from Thecoa doth thy handmaid come.
Tell me, and say, thou woman of Thecoa,
What aileth thee or what is come to pass.
Thy servant is a widow in Thecoa.
Two sons thy handmaid had; and they, my lord,
Fought in the field, where no man went betwixt,
And so the one did smite and slay the other.
And, lo, behold, the kindred doth arise,

That he therefore may be the child of death;
"For we will follow and destroy the heir."
So will they quench that sparkle that is left,
And leave nor name nor issue on the earth
To me or to thy handmaid's husband dead.
Woman, return; go home unto thy house:
I will take order that thy son be safe.
If any man say otherwise than well,
Bring him to me, and I shall chastise him;
For, as the Lord doth live, shall not a hair
Shed from thy son or fall upon the earth.
Woman, to God alone belongs revenge:
Shall, then, the kindred slay him for his sin?
Well hath King David to his handmaid spoke:
But wherefore, then, hast thou determined
So hard a part against the righteous tribes,
To follow and pursue the banished,
Whenas to God alone belongs revenge?
Assuredly thou sayest against thyself:
Therefore call home again the banished;
Call home the banished, that he may live,
And raise to thee some fruit in Israel.
Thou woman of Thecoa, answer me,
Answer me one thing I shall ask of thee:
Is not the hand of Joab in this work?
Tell me, is not his finger in this fact?
It is, my lord; his hand is in this work:
Assure thee, Joab, captain of thy host,
Hath put these words into thy handmaid's mouth;
And thou art as an angel from on high,
To understand the meaning of my heart;
Lo, where he cometh to his lord the king.
Say, Joab, didst thou send this woman in
To put this parable for Absalon?
Joab, my lord, did bid this woman speak,
And she hath said; and thou hast understood.
I have, and am content to do the thing.
Go fetch my son, that he may live with me.
Now God be blessed for King David's life!
Thy servant Joab hath found grace with thee,
In that thou sparest Absalon thy child. 
A beautiful and fair young man is he,
In all his body is no blemish seen;
His hair is like the wire of David's harp,
That twines about his bright and ivory neck;
In Israel is not such a goodly man;
And here I bring him to entreat for grace.
Hast thou slain in the fields of Hazor

But wherefore do I vex thy spirit so?
Live, and return from Gesur to thy house;
Return from Gesur to Jerusalem:
What boots it to be bitter to thy soul?
Amnon is dead. and Absalon survives.
Father I have offended Israel,
I have offended David and his house;
For Thamar's wrong hath Absalon misdone:
But David's heart is free from sharp revenge,
And Joab hath got grace for Absalon.
Depart with me, you men of Israel,
You that have followed Rabbah with the sword,
And ransack Ammon's richest treasuries.--
Live, Absalon, my son, live once in peace:
Peace [be] with thee, and with Jerusalem!
David is gone, and Absalon remains,
Flowering in pleasant spring-time of his youth:
Why liveth Absalon and is not honored
Of tribes and elders and the mightiest ones,
That round about his temples he may wear
Garlands and wreaths set on with reverence;
That every one that hath a cause to plead
Might come to Absalon and call for right?
Then in the gates of Sion would I sit,
And publish laws in great Jerusalem;
And not a man should live in all the land
But Absalon would do him reason's due:
Therefore I shall address me, as I may,
To love the men and tribes of Israel.
Proud lust, the bloodiest traitor to our souls,
Whose greedy throat nor earth, air, sea, or heaven,
Can glut or satisfy with any store,
Thou art the cause these torments suck my blood,
Piercing with venom of thy poisoned eyes
The strength and marrow of my tainted bones.
To punish Pharaoh and his cursed host,
The waters shrunk at great Adonai's voice
And sandy bottom of the sea appeared,
Offering his service at his servant's feet;
And, to inflict a plague on David's sin,
He makes his bowels traitors to his breast,
Winding about his heart with mortal gripes.
Ah, Absalon, the wrath of heaven inflames
Thy scorched bosom with ambitious heat,
And Satan sets thee on a lofty tower,
Showing thy thoughts the pride of Israel,
Of choice to cast thee on her ruthless stones!--
Weep with me, then, ye sons of Israel;
Lie down with David, and with David mourn
Before the Holy One that sees our hearts;
Season this heavy soil with showers of tears,
And fill the face of every flower with dew;
Weep, Israel, for David's soul dissolves,
Lading the fountains of his drowned eyes,
And pours her substance on the senseless earth.
Weep, Israel; O, weep for David's soul,
Strewing the ground with hair and garments torn,
For tragic witness of your hearty woes!
O, would our eyes were conduits to our hearts,
And that our hearts were seas of liquid blood,
To pour in streams upon this holy mount,
For witness we would die for David's woes!
Then should this Mount of Olives seem a plain
Drowned with a sea, that with our sighs should roar, 
And, in the murmur of his mounting waves,
Report our bleeding sorrows to the heavens,
For witness we would die for David's woes.
Earth cannot weep enough for David's woes:
Then weep, you heavens, and, all you clouds, dissolve,
That piteous stars may see our miseries,
And drop their golden tears upon the ground,
For witness how they weep for David's woes.
Now let my sovereign raise his prostrate bones,
And mourn not as a faithless man would do;
But be assured that Jacob's righteous God,
That promised never to forsake your throne,

Sadoc, high-priest, preserver of the ark,
Whose sacred virtue keeps the chosen crown,
I know my God is spotless in his vows,
And that these hairs shall greet my grave in peace:
But that my son should wrong his tendered soul,
And fight against his father's happiness,
Turns all my hopes into despair of him,
And that despair feeds all my veins with grief.
Think of it, David, as a fatal plague
Which grief preserveth, but preventeth not;
And turn thy drooping eyes upon the troops
That, of affection to thy worthiness,
Do swarm about the person of the king:
Cherish their valors and their zealous loves
With pleasant looks and sweet encouragements.
Methinks the voice of Ithay fills mine ears.
Let not the voice of Ithay loathe thine ears,
Whose heart would balm thy bosom with his tears.
But wherefore go'st thou to the wars with us?
Thou art a stranger here in Israel,
And son to Achis, mighty King of Gath;
Therefore return, and with thy father stay:
Thou cam'st but yesterday; and should I now
Let thee partake these troubles here with us?
Keep both thyself and all thy soldiers safe:
Let me abide the hazards of these arms,
And God requite the friendship thou hast showed.
As sure as Israel's God gives David life,
What place or peril shall contain the king,
The same will Ithay share in life and death,
Then, gentle Ithay, be thou still with us,
A joy to David, and a grace to Israel.--
Go, Sadoc, now, and bear the ark of God
Into the great Jerusalem again:
If I find favor in his gracious eyes,
Then will he lay his hand upon my heart
Yet once again before I visit death;
Giving it strength, and virtue to mine eyes,
To taste the comforts and behold the form
Of his fair ark and holy tabernacle:
But, if he say, "My wonted love is worn,
And I have no delight in David now,"
Here lie I armed with an humble heart
T' embrace the pains that anger shall impose,
And kiss the sword my lord shall kill me with.
Then, Sadoc, take Ahimaas thy son,
With Jonathan son to Abiathar;
And in these fields will I repose myself,
Till they return from you some certain news,
Thy servants will with joy obey the king,
And hope to cheer his heart with happy news.
Now that it be no grief unto the king,
Let me for good inform his majesty,
That, with unkind and graceless Absalon,
Achitophel your ancient counsellor
Directs the state of this rebellion.
Then doth it aim with danger at my crown.--
O thou, that hold'st his raging bloody bound
Within the circle of the silver moon,
That girds earth's centre with his watery scarf,
Limit the counsel of Achitophel,
No bounds extending to my soul's distress,
But turn his wisdom into foolishness!
Happiness and honor to my lord the king!
What happiness or honor may betide
His state that toils in my extremities?
O, let my gracious sovereign cease these griefs,
Unless he wish his servant Cusay's death,
Whose life depends upon my lord's relief!
Then let my presence with my sighs perfume
The pleasant closet of my sovereign's soul.
No, Cusay, no; thy presence unto me
Will be a burden, since I tender thee,
And cannot brook thy sighs for David's sake:
But if thou turn to fair Jerusalem,
And say to Absalon, as thou hast been
A trusty friend unto his father's seat,
So thou wilt be to him, and call him king,
Achitophel's counsel may be brought to naught.
Then having Sadoc and Abiathar,
All three may learn the secrets of my son,
Sending the message by Ahimaas,
And friendly Jonathan, who both are there.
Then rise, referring the success to heaven.
Cusay, I rise; though with unwieldy bones
I carry arms against my Absalon.
Now you that were my father's concubines,
Liquor to his unchaste and lustful fire,
Have seen his honor shaken in his house,
Which I possess in sight of all the world;
I bring ye forth for foils to my renown,
And to eclipse the glory of your king,
Whose life is with his honor fast enclosed
Within the entrails of a jetty cloud,
Whose dissolution shall pour down in showers
The substance of his life and swelling pride:
Then shall the stars light earth with rich aspects,
And heaven shall burn in love with Absalon,
Whose beauty will suffice to chase all mists,
And clothe the sun's sphere with a triple fire,
Sooner than his clear eyes should suffer stain,
Or be offended with a lowering day.
Thy father's honor, graceless Absalon,
And ours thus beaten with thy violent arms,
Will cry for vengeance to the host of heaven,
Whose power is ever armed against the proud,
And will dart plagues at thy aspiring head
For doing this disgrace to David's throne.
To David's throne, to David's holy throne,
Whose sceptre angels guard with swords of fire,
And sit as eagles on his conquering fist,
Ready to prey upon his enemies:
Then think not thou, the captain of his foes,
Wert thou much swifter than Azahell was,
That could outpace the nimble-footed roe,
To scape the fury of their thumping beaks
Or dreadful scope of their commanding wings.
Let not my lord the King of Israel
Be angry with a silly woman's threats;
But, with the pleasure he hath erst enjoyed,
Turn them into their cabinets again,
Till David's conquest be their overthrow.
Into your bowers, ye daughters of disdain,
Gotten by fury of unbridled lust,
And wash your couches with your mourning tears,
For grief that David's kingdom is decayed.
No, Absalon, his kingdom is enchained
Fast to the finger of great Jacob's God,
Which will not loose it for a rebel's love.
If I might give advice unto the king,
These concubines should buy their taunts with blood.
Amasa, no; but let thy martial sword
Empty the veins of David's armed men,
And let these foolish women scape our hands
To recompense the shame they have sustained,
First, Absalon was by the trumpet's sound
Proclaimed through Hebron King of Israel;
And now is set in fair Jerusalem
With complete state and glory of a crown:
Fifty fair footmen by my chariot run,
And to the air whose rupture rings my fame,
Where'er I ride, they offer reverence.
Why should not Absalon, that in his face
Carries the final purpose of his God,
That is, to work him grace in Israel,
Endeavor to achieve with all his strength
The state that most may satisfy his joy,
Keeping his statutes and his covenants pure?
His thunder is entangled in my hair,
And with my beauty is his lightning quenched:
I am the man he made to glory in,
When by the errors of my father's sin
He lost the path that led into the land
Wherewith our chosen ancestors were blessed.
Long may the beauteous King of Israel live,
To whom the people do by thousands swarm!
What meaneth Cusay so to greet his foe?
Is this the love thou show'st to David's soul,
To whose assistance thou hast vowed thy life?
Why leavest thou him in this extremity?
Because the Lord and Israel chooseth thee;
And as before I served thy father's turn
With counsel acceptable in his sight,
So likewise will I now obey his son.
Then welcome, Cusay, to King Absalon.--
And now, my lords and loving counsellors,
I think it time to exercise our arms 
Against forsaken David and his host.
Give counsel first, my good Achitophel,
What times and orders we may best observe
For prosperous manage of these high exploits.
Let me choose out twelve thousand valiant men:
And, while the night hides with her sable mists
The close endeavors cunning soldiers use,
I will assault thy discontented sire;
And, while with weakness of their weary arms,
Surcharged with toil, to shun thy sudden power,
The people fly in huge disordered troops
To save their lives, and leave the king alone,
Then will I smite him with his latest wound,
And bring the people to thy feet in peace.
Well hath Achitophel given his advice.
Yet let us hear what Cusay counsels us,
Whose great experience is well worth the ear.
Though wise Achitophel be much more meet
To purchase hearing with my lord the king,
For all his former counsels, than myself,
Yet, not offending Absalon or him,
This time it is not good nor worth pursuit;
For, well thou know'st, thy father's men are strong,
Chafing as she-bears robbed of their whelps:
Besides, the king himself a valiant man,
Trained up in feats and stratagems of war;
And will not, for prevention of the worst,
Lodge with the common soldiers in the field;
But now, I know, his wonted policies
Have taught him lurk within some secret cave,
Guarded with all his stoutest soldiers;
Which, if the forefront of his battle faint,
Will yet give out that Absalon doth fly,
And so thy soldiers be discouraged:
David himself withal, whose angry heart
Is as a lion's letted of his walk,
Will fight himself, and all his men to one,
Before a few shall vanquish him by fear.
My counsel therefore is, with trumpet's sound
To gather men from Dan to Bersabe,
That they may march in number like sea-sands,
That nestle close in [one] another's neck:
So shall we come upon him in our strength,
Like to the dew that falls in showers from heaven,
And leave him not a man to march withal.
Besides, if any city succor him,
The numbers of our men shall fetch us ropes,
And we will pull it down the river's stream,
That not a stone be left to keep us out.
What says my lord to Cusay's counsel now?
I fancy Cusay's counsel better far
Than that is given us from Achitophel;
And so, I think, doth every soldier here
Cusay's counsel is better than Achitophel's.
Then march we after Cusay's counsel all:
Sound trumpets through the bounds of Israel,
And muster all the men will serve the king,
That Absalon may glut his longing soul
With sole fruition of his father's crown.
Ill shall they fare that follow thy attempts,
That scorns the counsel of Achitophel.
Thus hath the power of Jacob's jealous God
Fulfilled his servant David's drifts by me,
And brought Achitophel's advice to scorn.
God save Lord Cusay, and direct his zeal
To purchase David's conquest 'gainst his son!
What secrets hast thou gleaned from Absalon?
These, sacred priests that bear the ark of God:--
Achitophel advised him in the night
To let him choose twelve thousand fighting men,
And he would come on David at unwares,
While he was weary with his violent toil:
But I advised to get a greater host,
And gather men from Dan to Bersabe,
To come upon him strongly in the fields.
Then send Ahimaas and Jonathan
To signify these secrets to the king,
And will him not to stay this night abroad;
But get him over Jordan presently,
Lest he and all his people kiss the sword.
Then go, Ahimaas and Jonathan,
And straight convey this message to the king.
Father, we will, if Absalon's chief spies
Prevent not this device, and stay us here. 
The man of Israel that hath ruled as king,
Or rather as the tyrant of the land,
Bolstering his hateful head upon the throne
That God unworthily hath blessed him with,
Shall now, I hope, lay it as low as hell,
And be deposed from his detested chair.
O, that my bosom could by nature bear
A sea of poison, to be poured upon
His cursed head that sacred balm hath graced
And consecrated King of Israel!
Or would my breath were made the smoke of hell,
Infected with the sighs of damned souls,
Or with the reeking of that serpent's gorge
That feeds on adders, toads, and venomous roots,
That, as I opened my revenging lips
To curse the shepherd for his tyranny,
My words might cast rank poison to his pores,
And make his swoll'n and rankling sinews crack,
Like to the combat-blows that break the clouds

See where he cometh that my soul abhors!
I have prepared my pocket full of stones
To cast at him, mingled with earth and dust,
Which, bursting with disdain, I greet him with.
Come forth, thou murderer and wicked man:
The lord hath brought upon thy cursed head
The guiltless blood of Saul and all his sons,
Whose royal throne thy baseness hath usurped;
And, to revenge it deeply on thy soul,
The Lord hath given the kingdom to thy son,
And he shall wreak the traitorous wrongs of Saul:
Even as thy sin hath still importuned heaven,
So shall thy murders and adultery
Be punished in the sight of Israel,
As thou deserv'st, with blood, with death, and hell.

Why doth [t]his dead dog curse my lord the king?
Let me alone to take away his head.
Why meddleth thus the son of Zeruia
To interrupt the action of our God?
Semei useth me with this reproach
Because the Lord hath sent him to reprove
The sins of David, printed in his brows
With blood, that blusheth for his conscience' guilt;
Who dares, then, ask him why he curseth me?
If, then, thy conscience tell thee thou hast sinned, 
And that thy life is odious to the world,
Command thy followers to shun thy face;
And by thyself here make away thy soul,
That I may stand and glory in thy shame,
I am not desperate, Semei, like thyself,
But trust unto the covenant of my God,
Founded on mercy, with repentance built,
And finished with the glory of my soul.
A murderer, and hope for mercy in thy end!
Hate and destruction sit upon thy brows
To watch the issue of thy damned ghost,
Which with thy latest gasp they'll take and tear,
Hurling in every pain of hell a piece.
Hence, murderer, thou shame to Israel,
Foul lecher, drunkard, plague to heaven and earth!
What, is it piety in David's thoughts,
So to abhor from laws of policy
In this extremity of his distress,
To give his subjects cause of carelessness?
Send hence the dog with sorrow to his grave.
Why should the sons of Zeruia seek to check
His spirit, which the Lord hath thus inspired?
Behold, my son which issued from my flesh,
With equal fury seeks to take my life:
How much more then the son of Jemini,
Chiefly since he doth naught but God's command?
It may be, he will look on me this day
With gracious eyes, and for his cursing bless
The heart of David in his bitterness.
What, dost thou fret my soul with sufferance? 
O, that the souls of Isboseth and Abner,
Which thou sent'st swimming to their graves in blood,
With wounds fresh bleeding, gasping for revenge,
Were here to execute my burning hate!
But I will hunt thy foot with curses still:
Hence, monster, murderer, mirror of contempt!
Long life to David, to his enemies death!
Welcome, Ahimaas and Jonathan:
What news sends Cusay to thy lord the king?

To pass the river Jordan presently,
Lest he and all his people perish here;
For wise Achitophel hath counselled Absalon
To take advantage of your weary arms,
And come this night upon you in the fields.
But yet the Lord hath made his counsel scorn,
And Cusay's policy with praise preferred;
Which was to number every Israelite,
And so assault you in their pride of strength.
Abiathar besides entreats the king
To send his men of war against his son,
And hazard not his person in the field.
Thanks to Abiathar, and to you both,
And to my Cusay, whom the Lord requite;
But ten times treble thanks to his soft hand
Whose pleasant touch hath made my heart to dance,
And play him praises in my zealous breast,
That turned the counsel of Achitophel
After the prayers of his servant's lips.
Now will we pass the river all this night,
And in the morning sound the voice of war,
The voice of bloody and unkindly war.
Then tell us how thou wilt divide thy men,
And who shall have the special charge herein.
Joab, thyself shall for thy charge conduct
The first third part of all my valiant men;
The second shall Abisai's valor lead;
The third fair Ithay, which I most should grace
For comfort he hath done to David's woes;
And I myself will follow in the midst.
That let not David; for, though we should fly,
Ten thousand of us were not half so much
Esteemed with David's enemies as himself:
Thy people, loving thee, deny thee this.
What seems them best, then, that will David do.
But now, my lords and captains, hear his voice
That never yet pierced piteous heaven in vain;
Then let it not slip lightly through your ears;--
For my sake spare the young man Absalon.
Joab, thyself didst once use friendly words
To reconcile my heart incensed to him;
If, then, thy love be to thy kinsman sound,
And thou wilt prove a perfect Israelite,
Friend him with deeds, and touch no hair of him,--
Not that fair hair with which the wanton winds
Delight to play, and love to make it curl,
Wherein the nightingales would build their nests,
And make sweet bowers in every golden tress
To sing their lover every night asleep:
O, spoil not, Joab, Jove's fair ornaments,
Which he hath sent to solace David's soul!
The best, ye see, my lords, are swift to sin;
To sin our feet are washed with milk of roes,
And dried again with coals of lightning.
O Lord, thou see'st the proudest sin's poor slave,
And with his bridle pull'st him to the grave!
For my sake, then, spare lovely Absalon.
We will, my lord, for thy sake favor him. 
Now hath Achitophel ordered his house,
And taken leave of every pleasure there:
Hereon depend Achitophel's delights,
And in this circle must his life be closed.
The wise Achitophel, whose counsel proved
Ever as sound for fortunate success
As if men asked the oracle of God,
Is now used like the fool of Israel:
Then set thy angry soul upon her wings,
And let her fly into the shade of death;
And for my death let heaven for ever weep,
Making huge floods upon the land I leave,
To ravish them and all their fairest fruits.
Let all the sighs I breathed for this disgrace,
Hang on my hedges like eternal mists,
As mourning garments for their master's death.
Ope, earth, and take thy miserable son
Into the bowels of thy cursed womb:
Once in a surfeit thou didst spew him forth;
Now for fell hunger suck him in again,
And be his body poison to thy veins.
And now, thou hellish instrument of heaven,
Once execute th' arrest of Jove's just doom,
And stop his breath that curseth Israel.
Now for the crown and throne of Israel,
To be confirmed with virtue of my sword,
And writ with David's blood upon the blade.
Now, Jove, let forth the golden firmament,
And look on him, with all thy fiery eyes,
Which thou hast made to give their glories light:
To show thou lov'st the virtue of thy hand,
Let fall a wreath of stars upon my head,
Whose influence may govern Israel
With state exceeding all her other kings.
Fight, lords and captains, that your sovereign's face
May shine in honor brighter than the sun;
And with the virtue of my beauteous rays
Make this fair land as fruitful as the fields
That with sweet milk and honey overflowed.
God, in the whizzing of a pleasant wind,
Shall march upon the tops of mulberry-trees,
To cool all breasts that burn with any griefs,
As whilom he was good to Moses' men.
By day the Lord shall sit within a cloud,
To guide your footsteps to the fields of joy;
And in the night a pillar, bright as fire,
Shall go before you, like a second sun,
Wherein the essence of his godhead is;
That day and night you may be brought to peace,
And never swerve from that delightsome path
That leads your souls to perfect happiness.
This shall he do for joy when I am king.
Then fight, brave captains, that these joys may fly
Into your bosoms with sweet victory. 
What angry angel, sitting in these shades,
Hath laid his cruel hands upon my hair,
And holds my body thus 'twixt heaven and earth?
Hath Absalon no soldier near his hand
That may untwine me this unpleasant curl,
Or wound this tree that ravisheth his lord?
O God, behold the glory of thy hand,
And choicest fruit of nature's workmanship,
Hang, like a rotten branch, upon this tree,
Fit for the axe and ready for the fire!
Since thou withhold'st all ordinary help
To loose my body from this bond of death,
O, let my beauty fill these senseless plants
With sense and power to loose me from this plague,
And work some wonder to prevent his death
Whose life thou mad'st a special miracle!
My lord, I saw the young Prince Absalon
Hang by the hair upon a shady oak,
And could by no means get himself unloosed.
Why slew'st thou not the wicked Absalon,
That rebel to his father and to heaven,
That so I might have given thee for thy pains
Ten silver shekels and a golden waist?
Not for a thousand shekels would I slay
The son of David, whom his father charged
Nor thou, Abisai, nor the son of Gath,
Should touch with stroke of deadly violence.
The charge was given in hearing of us all
And, had I done it, then, I know, thyself,
Before thou wouldst abide the king's rebuke,
Wouldst have accused me as a man of death.
I must not now stand trifling here with thee.
Help, Joab, help, O, help thy Absalon!
Let not thy angry thoughts be laid in blood,
In blood of him that sometimes nourished thee,
And softened thy sweet heart with friendly love:
O, give me once again my father's sight,
My dearest father and my princely sovereign!
That, shedding tears of blood before his face,
The ground may witness, and the heavens record,
My last submission sound and full of ruth.
Rebel to nature, hate to heaven and earth!
Shall I give help to him that thirsts the soul
Of his dear father and my sovereign lord?
Now see, the Lord hath tangled in a tree
The health and glory of thy stubborn heart,
And made thy pride curbed with a senseless plant:
Now, Absalon, how doth the Lord regard
The beauty whereupon thy hope was built,
And which thou thought'st his grace did glory in?
Find'st thou not now, with fear of instant death,
That God affects not any painted shape
Or goodly personage, when the virtuous soul
Is stuffed with naught but pride and stubbornness?
But, preach I to thee, while I should revenge
Thy cursed sin that staineth Israel,
And makes her fields blush with her children's blood?
Take that as part of thy deserved plague,
Which worthily no torment can inflict. 
O Joab, Joab, cruel, ruthless Joab!
Herewith thou wound'st thy kingly sovereign's heart,
Whose heavenly temper hates his children's blood,
And will be sick, I know, for Absalon.
O, my dear father, that thy melting eyes
Might pierce this thicket to behold thy son,
Thy dearest son, gored with a mortal dart!
Yet, Joab, pity me: pity my father, Joab;
Pity his soul's distress that mourns my life,
And will be dead, I know, to hear my death.
If he were so remorseful of thy state,
Why sent he me against thee with the sword?
All Joab means to pleasure thee withal
Is, to dispatch thee quickly of thy pain:
Hold, Absalon, Joab's pity is in this;
In this, proud Absalon, is Joab's love.
Such love, such pity Israel's God send thee,
And for his love to David pity me!
Ah, my dear father, see thy bowels bleed;
See death assault thy dearest Absalon;
See, pity, pardon, pray for Absalon!
See where the rebel in his glory hangs.--
Where is the virtue of thy beauty, Absalon?
Will any of us here now fear thy looks,
Or be in love with that thy golden hair
Wherein was wrapped rebellion 'gainst thy sire,
And cords prepared to stop thy father's breath?
Our captain Joab hath begun to us;
And here's an end to thee and all thy sins.
Come, let us take the beauteous rebel down,
And in some ditch, amidst this darksome wood,
Bury his bulk beneath a heap of stones,
Whose stony heart did hunt his father's death.
Well done, tall soldiers! take the traitor down,
And in this miry ditch inter his bones,
Covering his hateful breast with heaps of stones.
This shady thicket of dark Ephraim
Shall ever lower on his cursed grave;
Night-ravens and owls shall ring his fatal knell,
And sit exclaiming on his damned soul;
There shall they heap their preys of carrion,
Till all his grave be clad with stinking bones,
That it may loathe the sense of every man:
So shall his end breed horror to his name,
And to his traitorous fact eternal shame.
O dreadful precedent of his just doom,
Whose holy heart is never touched with ruth
Of fickle beauty or of glorious shape,
But with the virtue of an upright soul,
Humble and zealous in his inward thoughts,
Though in his person loathsome and deformed!
Now, since this story lends us other store,
To make a third discourse of David's life,
Adding thereto his most renowned death,
And all their deaths that at his death he judged,
Here end we this, and what here wants to please,
We will supply with treble willingness. 
Soldiers of Israel, and ye sons of Judah,
That have contended in these irksome broils,
And ripped old Israel's bowels with your swords;
The godless general of your stubborn arms
Is brought by Israel's helper to the grave,
A grave of shame, and scorn of all the tribes:
Now, then, to save your honors from the dust,
And keep your bloods in temper by your bones,
Let Joab's ensign shroud your manly heads,
Direct your eyes, your weapons, and your hearts,
To guard the life of David from his foes.
Error hath masked your much-too-forward minds,
And you have sinned against the chosen state,
Against his life, for whom your lives are blessed,
And followed an usurper to the field;
In whose just death your deaths are threatened;
But Joab pities your disordered souls,
And therefore offers pardon, peace, and love,
To all that will be friendly reconciled
To Israel's weal, to David, and to heaven.
Amasa, thou art leader of the host
That under Absalon have raised their arms;
Then be a captain wise and politic,
Careful and loving for thy soldiers' lives,
And lead them to this honorable league.

And for the gracious offer thou hast made
I give thee thanks, as much as for my head.--
Then, you deceived poor souls of Israel,
Since now ye see the errors you incurred,
With thanks and due submission be appeased;
And as ye see your captain's precedent,
Here cast we, then, our swords at Joab's feet,
Submitting with all zeal and reverence
Our goods and bodies to his gracious hands.
Stand up, and take ye all your swords again:
David and Joab shall be blessed herein.
Now let me go inform my lord the king
How God hath freed him from his enemies.
Another time, Ahimaas, not now.--
But, Cusay, go thyself, and tell the king
The happy message of our good success.
I will, my lord, and thank thee for thy grace.
What if thy servant should go too, my lord?
What news hast thou to bring since he is gone?
Yet do Ahimaas so much content,
That he may run about so sweet a charge.
Run, if thou wilt; and peace be with thy steps.
Now follow, that you may salute the king
With humble hearts and reconciled souls.
We follow, Joab, to our gracious king;
And him our swords shall honor to our deaths.
What means my lord, the lamp of Israel,
From whose bright eyes all eyes receive their light,
To dim the glory of his sweet aspect,
And paint his countenance with his heart's distress?
Why should his thoughts retain a sad conceit,
When every pleasure kneels before his throne,
And sues for sweet acceptance with his grace?
Take but your lute, and make the mountains dance,
Retrieve the sun's sphere, and restrain the clouds,
Give ears to trees, make savage lions tame,
Impose still silence to the loudest winds,
And fill the fairest day with foulest storms:
Then why should passions of much meaner power
Bear head against the heart of Israel?
Fair Bethsabe, thou mightst increase the strength
Of these thy arguments, drawn from my skill,
By urging thy sweet sight to my conceits,
Whose virtue ever served for sacred balm
To cheer my pinings past all earthly joys:
But, Bethsabe, the daughter of the Highest,
Whose beauty builds the towers of Israel,
She that in chains of pearl and unicorn
Leads at her train the ancient golden world,
The world that Adam held in paradise,
Whose breath refineth all infectious airs,
And makes the meadows smile at her repair,--

Fair Peace, the goddess of our graces here,
Is fled the streets of fair Jerusalem,
The fields of Israel, and the heart of David,
Leading my comforts in her golden chains,
Linked to the life and soul of Absalon.
Then is the pleasure of my sovereign's heart
So wrapped within the bosom of that son,
That Salomon, whom Israel's God affects,
And gave the name unto him for his love,
Should be no salve to comfort David's soul?
Salomon, my love, is David's lord;
Our God hath named him lord of Israel:
In him (for that, and since he is thy son,)
Must David needs be pleased at the heart;
And he shall surely sit upon my throne.
But Absalon, the beauty of my bones,
Fair Absalon, the counterfeit of love,
Sweet Absalon, the image of content,
Must claim a portion in his father's care,
And be in life and death King David's son.
Yet, as my lord hath said, let Salomon reign,
Whom God in naming hath anointed king.
Now is he apt to learn th' eternal laws,
Whose knowledge being rooted in his youth
Will beautify his age with glorious fruits;
While Absalon, incensed with graceless pride,
Usurps and stains the kingdom with his sin:
Let Salomon be made thy staff of age,
Fair Israel's rest, and honor of thy race.
Tell me, my Salomon, wilt thou embrace
Thy father's precepts graved in thy heart,
And satisfy my zeal to thy renown
With practice of such sacred principles 
As shall concern the state of lsrael?
My royal father, if the heavenly zeal,
Which for my welfare feeds upon your soul,
Were not sustained with virtue of mine own;
If the sweet accents of your cheerful voice
Should not each hour beat upon mine ears
As sweetly as the breath of heaven to him
That gaspeth scorched with the summer's sun;
I should be guilty of unpardoned sin,
Fearing the plague of heaven and shame of earth:
But since I vow myself to learn the skill
And holy secrets of his mighty hand
Whose cunning tunes the music of my soul,
It would content me, father, first to learn
How the Eternal framed the firmament;
Which bodies lend their influence by fire,
And which are filled with hoary winter's ice;
What sign is rainy, and what star is fair;

The year is still divided into months,
The months to days, the days to certain hours;
What fruitful race shall fill the future world;
Or for what time shall this round building stand;
What magistrates, what kings shall keep in awe
Men's minds with bridles of th' eternal law.
Wade not too far, my boy, in waves so deep:
The feeble eyes of our aspiring thoughts
Behold things present, and record things past;
But things to come exceed our human reach,
And are not painted yet in angels' eyes:
For those, submit thy sense, and say--"Thou power,
That now art framing of the future world,
Know'st all to come, not by the course of heaven,
By frail conjectures of inferior signs,
By monstrous floods, by flights and flocks of birds,
By bowels of a sacrificed beast,
Or by the figures of some hidden art;

Laying the ground and perfect architect
Of all our actions now before thine eyes,
From Adam to the end of Adam's seed:
O heaven, protect my weakness with thy strength!
So look on me that I may view thy face,
And see these secrets written in thy brows.
O sun, come dart thy rays upon my moon!
That now mine eyes, eclipsed to the earth,
May brightly be refined and shine to heaven;
Transform me from this flesh, that I may live,
Before my death, regenerate with thee.
O thou great God, ravish my earthly sprite!
That for the time a more than human skill
May feed the organons of all my sense;
That, when I think, thy thoughts may be my guide,
And, when I speak, I may be made by choice
The perfect echo of thy heavenly voice."
Thus say, my son, and thou shalt learn them all.
A secret fury ravisheth my soul,
Lifting my mind above her human bounds;
And, as the eagle, roused from her stand
With violent hunger, towering in the air,
Seizeth her feathered prey, and thinks to feed.
But seeing then a cloud beneath her feet,
Lets fall the fowl, and is emboldened
With eyes intentive to bedare the sun,
And styeth close unto his stately sphere;
So Salomon, mounted on the burning wings
Of zeal divine, lets fall his mortal food,
And cheers his senses with celestial air,
Treads in the golden starry labyrinth,
And holds his eyes fixed on Jehovah's brows.
Good father, teach me further what to do.
See, David, how his haughty spirit mounts,
Even now of height to wield a diadem:
Then make him promise that he may succeed,
And rest old Israel's bones from broils of war.
Nathan, thou prophet, sprung from Jesse's root,
I promise thee and lovely Bethsabe,
My Salomon shall govern after me.
He that hath touched thee with this righteous thought
Preserve the harbor of thy thoughts in peace!
My lord, thy servants of the watch have seen
One running hitherward from forth the wars.
If he be come alone, he bringeth news.
Another hath thy servant seen, my lord,
Whose running much resembles Sadoc's son.
He is a good man, and good tidings brings.
Peace and content be with my lord the king,
Whom Israel's God hath blessed with victory.
Tell me, Ahimaas, lives my Absalon?
I saw a troop of soldiers gathered,
But know not what the tumult might import,
Stand by, until some other may inform
The heart of David with a happy truth.
Happiness and honor live with David's soul,
Whom God hath blessed with conquest of his foes,
But, Cusay, lives the young man Absalon?
The stubborn enemies to David's peace,
And all that cast their darts against his crown,
Fare ever like the young man Absalon!
For as he rid the woods of Ephraim,
Which fought for thee as much as all thy men,
His hair was tangled in a shady oak;
And hanging there, by Joab and his men
Sustained the stroke of well deserved death.
Hath Absalon sustained the stroke of death?
Die, David, for the death of Absalon,
And make these cursed news the bloody darts
That through his bowels rip thy wretched breast.
Hence, David, walk the solitary woods,
And in some cedar's shade the thunder slew,
And fire from heaven hath made his branches black,
Sit mourning the decease of Absalon:
Against the body of that blasted plant
In thousand shivers break thy ivory lute,
Hanging thy stringless harp upon his boughs;
And through the hollow sapless sounding trunk
Bellow the torments that perplex thy soul.
There let the winds sit sighing till they burst;
Let tempest, muffled with a cloud of pitch,
Threaten the forests with her hellish face, 
And, mounted fiercely on her iron wings,
Rend up the wretched engine by the roots
That held my dearest Absalon to death.
Then let them toss my broken lute to heaven,
Even to his hands that beats me with the strings,
To show how sadly his poor shepherd sings.
Die, Bethsabe, to see thy David mourn,
To hear his tunes of anguish and of hell.
O, help, my David, help thy Bethsabe,
Whose heart is pierced with thy breathy swords,
And bursts with burden of ten thousand griefs!
Now sit thy sorrows sucking of my blood:
O, that it might be poison to their powers,
And that their lips might draw my bosom dry,
So David's love might ease him, though she die!
These violent passions come not from above;
David and Bethsabe offend the Highest,
To mourn in this immeasurable sort.
O Absalon, Absalon! O my son, my son!
Would God that I had died for Absalon!

And David lives to die for Absalon. 
Why lies the queen so prostrate on the ground?
Why is this company so tragic-hued?
Why is the king now absent from his men,
And marcheth not in triumph through the gates?
David, awake; if sleep have shut thine eyes,
Sleep of affection, that thou canst not see
The honor offered to the victor's head:
Joab brings conquest pierced on his spear,
And joy from all the tribes of Israel.
Thou man of blood, thou sepulchre of death,
Whose marble breast entombs my bowels quick,
Did I not charge thee, nay, entreat thy hand,
Even for my sake, to spare my Absalon?
And hast thou now, in spite of David's health,
And scorn to do my heart some happiness,
Given him the sword and spilt his purple soul?
What, irks it David, that he victor breathes,
That Judah and the fields of Israel
Should cleanse their faces from their children's blood,
What, art thou weary of thy royal rule?
Is Israel's throne a serpent in thine eyes,
And he that set thee there so far from thanks,
That thou must curse his servant for his sake?
Hast thou not said that, as the morning light,
The cloudless morning, so should be thine house,
And not as flowers by the brightest rain
Which grow up quickly and as quickly fade?
Hast thou not said, the wicked are as thorns,
That cannot be preserved with the hand,
And that the man shall touch them must be armed
With coats of iron and garments made of steel,
Or with the shaft of a defenced spear?
And art thou angry he is now cut off
That led the guiltless swarming to their deaths,
And was more wicked than an host of men?
Advance thee from thy melancholy den,
And deck thy body with thy blissful robes,
Or, by the Lord that sways the heaven I swear,
I'll lead thine armies to another king
Shall cheer them for their princely chivalry,
And not sit daunted, frowning in the dark,
When his fair looks, with oil and wine refreshed,
Should dart into their bosoms gladsome beams,
And fill their stomachs with triumphant feasts;
That when elsewhere stem war shall sound his trump,
And call another battle to the field,
Fame still may bring thy valiant soldiers home,
And for their service happily confess
She wanted worthy trumps to sound their prowess:
Take thou this course and live; refuse and die.
Come, brother, let him sit there till he sink;
Some other shall advance the name of Joab.
O, stay, my lords, stay! David mourns no more,
But riseth to give honor to your acts.
Then happy art thou, David's fairest son,
That, freed from the yoke of earthly toils,
And sequestered from sense of human sins,
Thy soul shall joy the sacred cabinet

Thy changed spirit with a heaven of bliss.
Then thou art gone; ah, thou art gone, my son!
To heaven, I hope, my Absalon is gone:
Thy soul there placed in honor of the saints,
Or angels clad with immortality,
Shall reap a sevenfold grace for all thy griefs;
Thy eyes, now no more eyes but shining stars,
Shall deck the flaming heavens with novel lamps;
There shalt thou taste the drink of seraphins,
And cheer thy feelings with archangels' food;
Thy day of rest, thy holy sabbath-day,
Shall be eternal; and, the curtain drawn,
<ALCAST.txt>
Honor, the spur that pricks the princely mind 
To follow rule and climb the stately chair, 
With great desire inflames the Portingal, 
An honorable and courageous king, 
To undertake a dangerous dreadful war, 
And aid with Christian arms the barbarous Moor, 
The Negro Muly Hamet, that withholds 
The kingdom from his uncle Abdelmelec, 
And in his throne installs his cruel son, 
This brave Barbarian lord, Muly Mollocco. 
The passage to the crown by murder made, 
Abdallas dies, and designs this tyrant king; 
Of whom we treat, sprung from the Arabian Moor, 
Black in his look, and bloody in his deeds; 
And in his shirt, stained with a cloud of gore, 
Presents himself, with naked sword in hand, 
Accompanied, as now you may behold, 
With devils coated in the shapes of men. 
Like those that were by kind of murder mummed, 
Sit down and see what heinous stratagems 
These damned wits contrive; and lo, alas, 
How like poor lambs prepared for sacrifice, 
This traitor-king hales to their longest home 
These tender lords, his younger brethren both. 
His brethren thus in fatal bed behearsed, 
His father's brother, of too light belief, 
This Negro puts to death by proud command. 
Say not these things are feigned, for true they are;  
And understand how, eager to enjoy 
His father's crown, this unbelieving Moor, 
Murdering his uncle and his brethren, 
Triumphs in his ambitious tyranny; 
Till Nemesis, high mistress of revenge, 
That with her scourge keeps all the world in awe, 
With thundering drums awakes the God of War 
And calls the Furies from Avernus' crags, 
To range and rage and vengeance to inflict, 
Vengeance on this accursed Moor for sin. 
And now behold how Abdelmelec comes, 
Uncle to this unhappy traitor-king, 
Armed with great aid that Amurath had sent, 
Great Amurath, Emperor of the East, 
For service done to Sultan Solimon, 
Under whose colors he had served in field, 
Flying the fury of this Negro's father, 
That wronged his brethren to install his son. 
Sit you, and see this true and tragic war, 
A modern matter full of blood and ruth,
Where three bold kings, confounded in their height, 
Fall to the earth, contending for a crown; 
And call this war, the battle of Alcazar. 
All hail, Argerd Zareo and ye Moors, 
Salute the frontiers of your native home. 
Cease rattling drums, and Abdelmelec here, 
Throw up thy trembling hands to heaven's throne, 
Pay to thy God due thanks, and thanks to him 
That strengthens thee with mighty gracious arms 
Against the proud usurper of thy right, 
The royal seat and crown of Barbary, 
Great Amurath, great emperor of the world. 
The world bear witness how I do adore  
The sacred name of Amurath the Great. 
Calcepius Bassa, Bassa Calcepius, 
To thee and to thy trusty band of men 
That carefully attend us in our camp, 
Picked soldiers, comparable to the guard 
Of Myrmidons that kept Achilles' tent, 
Such thanks we give to thee and to them all, 
As may concern a poor distressed king, 
In honor and in princely courtesy. 
Courteous and honorable Abdelmelec,
We are not come, at Amurath's command 
As mercenary men to serve for pay, 
But as sure friends, by our great master sent 
To gratify and to remunerate 
Thy love, thy loyalty, and forwardness, 
Thy service in his father's dangerous war, 
And to perform in view of all the world 
The true office of right and royalty: 
To see thee in thy kingly chair enthroned, 
To settle and to seat thee in the same,
To make thee Emperor of this Barbary, 
Are come the viceroys and sturdy janissaries 
Of Amurath, son to Sultan Solimon. 
Long live my lord, the sovereign of my heart, 
Lord Abdelmelec, whom the god of kings, 
The mighty Amurath hath happy made, 
And long live Amurath for this good deed. 
Our Moors have seen the silver moons to wave, 
In banners bravely spreading o'er the plain, 
And in this, semicircles have descried, 
All in a golden field, a star to rise, 
A glorious comet that begins to blaze, 
Promising happy sorting to us all. 
Brave man-at-arms, whom Amurath hath sent 
To sow the lawful true-succeeding seed 
In Barbary, that bows and groans withal 
Under a proud usurping tyrant's mace, 
Right thou the wrongs this rightful king hath borne. 
Distressed ladies, and ye dames of Fess, 
Sprung from the true Arabian Muly Xarif,
The lodestar and the honor of our line, 
Now clear your watery eyes, wipe tears away, 
And cheerfully give welcome to these arms. 
Amurath hath sent scourges by his men 
To whip that tyrant traitor-king from hence, 
That hath usurped from us, and maimed you all. 
Soldiers, sith rightful quarrels [by heaven's] aid 
Successful are, and men that manage them, 
Fight not in fear, as traitors and their feres. 
That you may understand what arms we bear, 
What lawful arms against our brother's son, 
In sight of heaven, even of mine honor's worth, 
Truly I will deliver and discourse 
The sum of all. Descended from the line 
Of Mahomet, our grandsire Muly Xarif, 
With store of gold and treasure leaves Arabia 
And strongly plants himself in Barbary. 
And of the Moors that now with us do wend 
Our grandsire, Muly Xarif, was the first. 
From him well wot ye Muly Mahamet Xeque,  
Who in his lifetime made a perfect law, 
Confirmed with general voice of all his peers, 
That in his kingdom should successively 
His sons succeed. Abdallas was the first, 
Eldest of four, Abdelmunen the second, 
And we the rest, my brother and myself. 
Abdallas reigned his time. But see the change! 
He labors to invest his son in all, 
To disannul the law our father made 
And disinherit us, his brethren,
And in his lifetime wrongfully proclaims 
His son for king that now contends with us. 
Therefore I crave to re-obtain my right, 
That Muly Mahamet the traitor holds, 
Traitor and bloody tyrant both at once, 
That murdered his younger brethren both. 
But on this damned wretch, this traitor-king, 
The gods shall pour down showers of sharp revenge. 
And thus a matter not to you unknown 
I have delivered; yet for no distrust
Of loyalty, my well-beloved friends, 
But that th' occasions, fresh in memory, 
Of these encumbers so may move your minds. 
As for the lawful true-succeeding prince 
Ye neither think your lives nor honors dear, 
Spent in a quarrel just and honorable. 
Such and no other we repute the cause 
That forwardly for thee we undertake, 
Thrice-puissant and renowned Abdelmelec, 
Our lives and honors frankly to expose 
To all the dangers that on war attends, 
As freely and as resolutely all 
As any Moor whom thou commandest most. 
To chastise him with fury of the sword 
Whose pride doth swell to sway beyond his reach? 
Follow this pride then with fury of revenge. 
Of death, of blood, of wreak, and deep revenge, 
Shall Rubin Archis frame her tragic songs. 
In blood, in death, in murder, and misdeed, 
This heaven's malice did begin and end. 
Rubin, these rites to Abdelmunen's ghost 
Have pierced by this to Pluto's cave below; 
The bells of Pluto ring revenge amain, 
The furies and the fiends conspire with thee. 
War bids me draw my weapons for revenge 
Of my deep wrongs and my dear brother's death. 
Sheath not your swords, you soldiers of Amurath, 
Sheath not your swords, you Moors of Barbary
That fight in right of your anointed king, 
But follow to the gates of death and hell, 
Pale death and hell, to entertain his soul. 
Follow, I say, to burning Phlegethon, 
This traitor-tyrant and his companies. 
Heave up your swords against these stony holds 
Wherein these barbarous rebels are enclosed. 
Called for is Abdelmelec by the gods, 
To sit upon the throne of Barbary. 
Bassa, great thanks, the honor of the Turks. 
Forward, brave lords, unto this rightful war! 
How can this battle but successful be, 
Where courage meeteth with a rightful cause? 
Go in good time, my best-beloved lord, 
Successful in thy work thou undertakes! 
Pisano, take a cornet of our horse, 
As many argolets and armed pikes, 
And with our carriage march away before 
That to Moroccus leads the lower way: 
Our enemies keep upon the mountain tops, 
And have encamped themselves not far from Fess. 
And we must see our treasure may go safe. 
The news, my lord, is war; war and revenge. 
And, if I shall declare the circumstance, 
Rubin, our uncle's wife,that wrings her hands 
For Abdelmunen's death, accompanied 
With many dames of Fess in mourning weeds, 
Near to Argier encountered Abdelmelec, 
That bends his force, puffed up with Amurath's aid, 
Against your holds and castles of defense. 
The younger brother, Muly Mahamet Seth,
Greets the great Bassa that the King of Turks 
Sends to invade your right and royal realm, 
And basely beg revenge, arch-rebels all, 
To be inflict upon our progeny. 
Why, boy, is Amurath's Bassa such a bug, 
That he is marked to do this doughty deed? 
Then, Bassa, lock the winds in wards of brass, 
Thunder from heaven, damn wretched men to death, 
Bear all the offices of Saturn's sons! 
Be Pluto, then, in hell, and bar the fiends, 
Take Neptune's force to thee and calm the seas, 
And execute Jove's justice on the world. 
Convey Tamburlaine into our Afric here, 
To chastise and to menace lawful kings: 
Tamburlaine, triumph not, for thou must die, 
As Philip did, Caesar, and Caesar's peers. 
The Bassa grossly flattered to his face, 
And Amurath's praise advanced above the clouds. 
Upon the plains, the soldiers being spread, 
And that brave guard of sturdy janissaries
That Amurath to Abdelmelec gave, 
And bade him boldly be with them as safe 
As if he slept within a walled town; 
Who take them to their weapons, threatening revenge, 
Bloody revenge, bloody revengeful war. 
Away, and let me hear no more of this. 
Are we successors to the great Abdallas 
Descended from th' Arabian Muly Xarif, 
Boy, seest here this scimitar by my side? 
Sith they begin to bathe [their swords] in blood, 
Blood be the theme whereon our time shall tread. 
Such slaughter with my weapon shall I make 
As through the stream and bloody channels deep 
Our Moors shall sail in ships and pinnaces 
From Tangier shore unto the gates of Fess. 
And of those slaughtered bodies shall thy son 
A huge tower erect like Nimrod's frame,
To threaten those unjust and partial gods 
That to Abdallas' lawful seed deny 
A long, a happy, and triumphant reign. 
Fly, King of Fess! King of Moroccus, fly! 
Fly with thy friends, Emperor of Barbary! 
O, fly the sword and fury of the foe, 
That rageth as the ramping lioness 
In rescue of her younglings from the bear! 
Thy towns and holds by numbers basely yield, 
Thy land to Abdelmelec's rule resigns,  
Thy carriage and thy treasure taken is 
By Amurath's soldiers, that have sworn thy death. 
Fly Amurath's power and Abdelmelec's threats, 
Or thou and thine look here to breathe your last. 
Villain, what dreadful sound of death and flight 
Is this, wherewith thou dost afflict our ears? 
But if there be no safety to abide 
The favor, fortune, and success of war, 
Away in haste, roll on, my chariot wheels, 
Restless till I be safely set in shade
Of some unhaunted place, some blasted grove 
Of deadly yew or dismal cypress tree, 
Far from the light or comfort of the sun, 
There to curse heaven and he that heaves me hence; 
To sick as Envy at Cecropia's gate, 
And pine with thought and terror of mishaps. 
Now war begins his rage and ruthless reign, 
And Nemesis, with bloody whip in hand, 
Thunders for vengeance on this Negro-Moor. 
Nor may the silence of the speechless night, 
Divine architect of murders and misdeeds, 
Of tragedies and tragic tyrannies, 
Hide or contain the barbarous cruelty 
Of this usurper to his progeny. 
Hark, lords, as in a hollow place afar, 
The dreadful shrieks and clamors that resound,
And sound revenge upon this traitor's soul, 
Traitor to kin and kind, to gods and men. 
Now Nemesis, upon her doubling drum, 
Moved with this ghastly moan, this sad complaint, 
'Larums aloud into Alecto's ears, 
And with her thundering wakes, whereas they lie 
In cave as dark as hell and beds of steel, 
The Furies, just imps of dire revenge. 
"Revenge!" cries Abdelmunen's grieved ghost, 
And rouseth with the terror of this noise, 
These nymphs of Erebus; "Wreak and revenge!" 
Ring out the souls of his unhappy brethren. 
And now start up these torments of the world, 
Waked with the thunder of Rhamnusia's drum 
And fearful echoes of these grieved ghosts, 
Alecto, with her brand and bloody torch, 
Megrera, with her whip and snaky hair, 
Tisiphone, with her fatal murdering iron. 
These three conspire, these three complain and moan. 
Thus, Muly Mahamet, is a council held 
To wreak the wrongs and murders thou hast done. 
By this imagine was this barbarous Moor 
Chased from his dignity and his diadem, 
And lives forlorn among the mountain-shrubs, 
And makes his food the flesh of savage beasts. 
Amurath's soldiers have by this installed 
Good Abdelmelec in his royal seat. 
The dames of Fess and ladies of the land, 
In honor of the son of Solimon, 
Erect a statue made of beaten gold  
And sing to Amurath songs of lasting praise. 
Muly Mahamet's fury over-ruled, 
His cruelty controlled, and pride rebuked, 
Now at last, when sober thoughts renewed, 
Care of his kingdom and desired crown, 
The aid that once was offered and refused, 
By messengers he furiously implores, 
Sebastian's aid, brave King of Portugal. 
He, forward in all arms and chivalry, 
Hearkens to his ambassadors and grants 
What they in letters and by words entreat. 
Now listen, lordings, now begins the game, 
Sebastian's tragedy in this tragic war. 
Now hath the sun displayed his golden beams, 
And dusky clouds dispersed, the welkin clears, 
Wherein the twenty-coloured rainbow shows. 
After this fight, happy and fortunate, 
And Victory, adorned with Fortune's plumes, 
Alights on Abdelmelec's glorious crest, 
Here find we time to breathe, and now begin 
To pay thy due and duties thou dost owe 
To heaven and earth, to gods and Amurath. 
And now draw near, and heaven and earth give ear, 
Give ear and record, heaven and earth, with me; 
Ye lords of Barbary, hearken and attend, 
Hark to the words I speak and vow I make 
To plant the true succession of the crown. 
Lo, lords, in our seat royal to succeed, 
Our only brother here we do install, 
And by the name of Muly Mahamet Seth 
Entitle him true heir unto the crown. 
Ye gods of heaven, gratulate this deed 
That men on earth may therewith stand content. 
Lo, thus my due and duty is done, I pay 
To heaven and earth, to gods and Amurath! 
Renowned Bassa, to remunerate 
Thy worthiness and magnanimity, 
Behold, the noblest ladies of the land 
Bring present tokens of their gratitude. 
Bassa, by this commends herself to thee, 
Resigns the token of her thankfulness.  
To Amurath, the god of earthly kings, 
Doth Rubin give and sacrifice her son. 
Not with sweet smoke of fire or sweet perfume, 
But with his father's sword, his mother's thanks, 
Doth Rubin give her son to Amurath. 
As Rubin gives her son, so we ourselves 
To Amurath give, and fall before his face. 
Bassa, wear thou the gold of Barbary, 
And glister like the palace of the sun 
In honor of the deed that thou hast done.
Well worthy of the aid of Amurath 
Is Abdelmelec and these noble dames. 
Rubin, thy son I shall ere long bestow, 
Where thou dost him bequeath in honor's fee, 
On Amurath, mighty Emperor of the East, 
That shall receive the imp of royal race 
With cheerful looks and gleams of princely grace. 
This chosen guard of Amurath's janissaries 
I leave to honor and attend on thee, 
King of Morocco, conqueror of thy foes, 
True King of Fess, Emperor of Barbary; 
Muly Molocco, live and keep thy seat, 
In spite of fortune's spite or enemies' threats. 
Ride, Bassa, now; bold Bassa, homeward ride 
As glorious as great Pompey in his pride. 
Welcome to Lisbon, valiant Catholics, 
Welcome, brave Englishmen, to Portugal. 
Most reverent primate of the Irish church. 
And noble Stukley, famous by thy name, 
Welcome, thrice-welcome to Sebastian's town. 
And welcome, English captains, to you all. 
It joyeth us to see his Holiness' fleet 
Cast anchor happily upon our coast. 
These welcomes, worthy governor of Lisbon, 
Argue an honorable mind in thee,
But treat of our misfortune therewithal. 
To Ireland, by Pope Gregory's command, 
Were we all bound, and therefore thus embarked 
To land our forces there at unawares, 
Conquering the island for his Holiness 
And so restore it to the Roman faith. 
This was the cause of our expedition, 
And Ireland long ere this had been subdued 
Had not foul weather brought us to this bay. 
  
And 'longs not Ireland to that kingdom, lords? 
Then may I speak my conscience in the cause. 
Sans scandal to the holy see of Rome, 
Unhonorable is this expedition, 
And misbeseeming you to meddle in. 
Lord Governor of Lisbon, understand, 
As we are Englishmen, so are we men, 
And I am Stukley, so resolved in all 
To follow rule, honor, and empery, 
Not to be bent so strictly to the place
Wherein at first I blew the fire of life, 
But that I may at liberty make choice 
Of all the continents that bounds the world. 
For why I make it not so great desert 
To be begot or born in any place, 
Sith that's a thing of pleasure and of ease 
That might have been performed elsewhere as well. 
Good Captain Stukley. Be it far from me 
To take exceptions beyond my privilege. 
We must affect our country as our parents, 
And if at any time we alienate 
Our love or industry from doing it honor, 
It must respect effects and touch the soul, 
Matter of conscience and religion, 
And not desire of rule or benefit. 
The reverent, lordly Bishop of Saint Asses. 
The bishop talks according to his coat,
And takes not measure of it by his mind. 
You see he hath it made thus large and wide, 
Because he may convert it, as he list, 
To any form may fit the fashion best. 
Captain, you do me wrong to descant thus 
Upon my coat or double conscience, 
And cannot answer it in another place. 
'Tis but in jest, lord bishop; put it up, 
And all as friends deign to be entertained, 
As my ability here can make provision. 
Shortly shall I conduct you to the king, 
Whose welcomes evermore to strangers are 
Princely and honorable, as his state becomes. 
Thanks, worthy governor. Come, bishop, come, 
Will you show fruits of quarrel and of wrath? 
Come, let's in with my Lord of Lisbon here, 
And put all conscience into one carouse, 
Letting it out again as we may live. 
[Exeunt all except Stukley] 
There shall no action pass my hand or sword, 
That cannot make a step to gain a crown; 
No word shall pass the office of my tongue 
That sounds not of affection to a crown. 
No thought have being in my lordly breast 
That works not every way to win a crown. 
Deeds, words, and thoughts, shall all be as a king's; 
My chiefest company shall be with kings; 
And my deserts shall counterpoise a king's; 
Why should not I, then, look to be a king? 
I am the Marquis now of Ireland made, 
And will be shortly King of Ireland. 
King of a mole-hill had I rather be, 
Than the richest subject of a monarchy. 
Huff it, brave mind, and never cease t' aspire, 
Before thou reign sole king of thy desire. 
Where art thou, boy? Where is Calipolis? 
O deadly wound that passeth by mine eye, 
The fatal poison of my swelling heart! 
O fortune, constant in unconstancy! 
Fight earthquakes in the entrails of the earth, 
And eastern whirlwinds in the hellish shades! 
Some foul contagion of the infected heaven 
Blast all the trees, and in their cursed tops 
The dismal night-raven and tragic owl 
Breed, and become foretellers of my fall,  
The fatal ruin of my name and me! 
Adders and serpents hiss at my disgrace, 
And wound the earth with anguish of their stings! 
Now, Abdelmelec, now triumph in Fess; 
Fortune hath made thee King of Barbary. 
Alas, my lord, what boot these huge exclaims 
T' advantage us in this distressed estate? 
O, pity our perplexed estate, my lord, 
And turn all curses to submiss complaints, 
And those complaints to actions of relief!  
I faint, my lord; and naught may cursing plaints 
Refresh the fading substance of my life. 
Faint all the world, consume and be accursed, 
Since my state faints, [consumes,] and is accursed. 
Yet patience, lord, to conquer sorrows so. 
What patience is for him that lacks his crown? 
There is no patience where the loss is such. 
The shame of my disgrace hath put on wings, 
And swiftly flies about this earthly ball. 
Carest thou to live, then, fond Calipolis, 
When he that should give essence to thy soul, 
He on whose glory all thy joy should stay, 
Is soulless, gloryless, and desperate, 
Crying for battle, famine, sword, and fire, 
Rather than calling for relief or life? 
But be content, thy hunger shall have end: 
Famine shall pine to death, and thou shalt live. 
I will go hunt these cursed solitaries, 
And make the sword and target here my hound 
To pull down lions and untamed beasts.
Tush, mother, cherish your unhearty soul, 
And feed with hope of happiness and ease; 
For if by valor or by policy 
My kingly father can be fortunate, 
We shall be Jove's commanders once again, 
And flourish in a threefold happiness. 
His majesty hath sent Sebastian, 
The good and harmless King of Portugal, 
A promise to resign the royalty 
And kingdom of Morocco to his hands.  
And when this haughty offer takes effect, 
And works affiance in Sebastian, 
My gracious lord, warned wisely to advise, 
I doubt not but will watch occasion, 
And take her fore-top by the slenderest hair, 
To rid us of this miserable life. 
Good madam, cheer yourself: my father's wise; 
He can submit himself and live below, 
Make show of friendship, promise, vow, and swear, 
Till, by the virtue of his fair pretence,
Sebastian trusting his integrity, 
He makes himself possessor of such fruits 
As grow upon such great advantages. 
But more dish on our hangs on such misdeeds 
Than all the profit their return can bear. 
Such secret judgments have the heavens imposed 
Upon the drooping state of Barbary, 
As public merits in such lewd attempts 
Have drawn with violence upon our heads. 
Hold thee, Calipolis, feed, and faint no more; 
This flesh I forced from a lioness, 
Meat of a princess, for a princess meet. 
Learn by her noble stomach to esteem 
Penury plenty in extremest dearth; 
Who, when she saw her foragement bereft, 
Pined not in melancholy or childish fear, 
But as brave minds are strongest in extremes, 
So she, redoubling her former force, 
Ranged through the woods, and rent the breeding vaults 
Of proudest savages to save herself. 
Feed, then, and faint not, fair Calipolis; 
For rather than fierce Famine shall prevail 
To gnaw thy entrails with her thorny teeth, 
The conquering lioness shall attend on thee 
And lay huge heaps of slaughtered carcasses, 
As bulwarks in her way, to keep her back. 
I will provide thee of a princely osprey, 
That as she flyeth over fish in pools, 
The fish shall turn their glistering bellies up, 
And thou shalt take thy liberal choice of all. 
Jove's stately bird with wide-commanding wings 
Shall hover still about thy princely head, 
And beat down fowl by shoals into thy lap: 
Feed, then, and faint not, fair Calipolis. 
Thanks, good my lord, and though my stomach be 
Too queasy to digest such bloody meat, 
Yet, strength I it with virtue of my mind, 
I doubt no whit but I shall live, my lord. 
Into the shades, then, fair Calipolis, 
And make thy son and Negroes here good cheer: 
Feed and be fat, that we may meet the foe 
With strength and terror, to revenge our wrong. 
Call forth those Moors, those men of Barbary, 
That came with letters from the King of Fess. 
Ye warlike lords and men of chivalry, 
Honorable ambassadors of this high regent, 
Hark to Sebastian, King of Portugal. 
These letters sent from your distressed lord, 
Torn from his throne by Abdelmelec's hand, 
Strengthened and raised by furious Amurath, 
Import a kingly favor at our hands, 
For aid to re-obtain his royal seat 
And place his fortunes in their former height. 
For 'quital of which honorable arms, 
By these his letters he doth firmly vow 
Wholly to yield and to surrender up 
The kingdom of Moroccus to our hands, 
And to become to us contributary 
And to content himself with the realm of Fess. 
These lines, my lords, writ in extremity, 
Contain therefore but during fortune's date, 
How shall Sebastian, then, believe the same? 
Viceroys, and most Christian king of Portugal, 
To satisfy thy doubtful mind herein, 
Command forthwith a blazing brand of fire 
Be brought in presence of thy majesty; 
Then shalt thou see, by our religious vows 
And ceremonies most inviolate, 
How firm our sovereign's protestations are. 
Behold, my lord, this binds our faith to thee: 
In token that great Muly Mahamet's hand 
Hath writ no more than his stout heart allows,  
And will perform to thee and to thine heirs, 
We offer here our hands into this flame; 
And as this flame doth fasten on this flesh, 
So from our souls we wish it may consume 
The heart of our great lord and sovereign, 
Muly Mahamet King of Barbary, 
If his intent agree not with his words. 
These ceremonies and protestations 
Sufficeth us, ye lords of Barbary. 
Therefore return this answer to your king: 
Assure him by the honor of my crown, 
And by Sebastian's true unfeigned faith, 
He shall have aid and succor to recover 
And seat him in his former empery. 
Let him rely upon our princely word: 
Tell him by August we will come to him 
With such a power of brave impatient minds, 
As Abdelmelec and great Amurath 
Shall tremble at the strength of Portugal. 
Thanks to the renowned King of Portugal, 
On whose stout promises our state depends. 
Barbarians, go glad your distressed king, 
And say Sebastian lives to right his wrong. 
Duke of Avero, call in those Englishmen, 
Don Stukley, and those captains of the fleet 
That lately landed in our bay of Lisbon. 
Now breathe, Sebastian, and in breathing blow 
Some gentle gale of thy new-formed joys. 
Duke of Avero, it shall be your charge 
To take the muster of the Portugals 
And bravest bloods of all our country. 
Lewes de Silva, you shall be dispatched 
With letters unto Philip, King of Spain. 
Tell him we crave his aid in this behalf; 
I know our brother Philip nil deny 
His furtherance in this holy Christian war. 
Duke of Barceles, as thy ancestors 
Have always loyal been to Portugal, 
So now, in honor of thy toward youth, 
Thy charge shall be to Antwerp speedily,  
To hire us mercenary men-at-arms. 
Promise them princely pay; and be thou sure 
Thy word is ours: Sebastian speaks the word. 
I beseech your majesty, employ me in this war. 
Christopher de Tavera, next unto myself, 
My good Hephrestion, and my bedfellow, 
Thy cares and mine shall be alike in this, 
And thou and I will live and die together. 
And now, brave Englishmen, to you [I turn] 
Whom angry storms have put into our bay;  
Hold not your fortune e'er the worse in this: 
We hold our stranger's honors in our hand, 
And for distressed frank and free relief. 
Tell me, then, Stukley, for that's thy name I trow, 
Wilt thou, in honor of thy country's fame, 
Hazard thy person in this brave exploit, 
And follow us to fruitful Barbary, 
With these six thousand soldiers thou hast brought 
And choicely picked through wanton Italy? 
Thou art a man of gallant personage, 
Proud in thy looks, and famous every way. 
Courageous king, the wonder of my thoughts! 
And yet, my lord, with pardon understand, 
Myself and these whom weather hath enforced 
To lie at road upon thy gracious coast, 
Did bend our course and made amain for Ireland. 
I tell thee, Stukley, they are far too weak 
To violate the Queen of Ireland's right. 
For Ireland's Queen commandeth England's force. 
Were every ship ten thousand on the seas, 
Manned with the strength of all the eastern kings, 
Conveying all the monarchs of the world, 
To invade the island where her highness reigns, 
'Twere all in vain, for heavens and destinies 
Attend and wait upon her majesty. 
Sacred, imperial, and holy is her seat, 
Shining with wisdom, love, and mightiness.  
Nature, that everything imperfect made, 
Fortune, that never yet was constant found, 
Time, that defaceth every golden show, 
Dare not decay, remove, or be impure. 
Both nature, time, and fortune, all agree 
To bless and serve her royal majesty. 
The wallowing ocean hems her round about, 
Whose raging floods do swallow up her foes. 
And on the rocks their ships in pieces split, 
And even in Spain, where all the traitors dance  
And play themselves upon a sunny day, 
Securely guard the west part of her isle. 
The south, the narrow Britain-sea begirts, 
Where Neptune sits in triumph to direct 
Their course to hell that aim at her disgrace. 
The German seas alongst the east do run, 
Where Venus banquets all her water-nymphs, 
That with her beauty glancing on the waves 
Distains the cheek of fair Proserpina. 
Advise thee, then, proud Stukley, ere thou pass  
To wrong the wonder of the highest God. 
Sith danger, death, and hell do follow thee, 
Thee, and them all that seek to danger her. 
If honor be the mark whereat thou aim'st, 
Then follow me in holy Christian wars, 
And leave to seek thy country's overthrow. 
Rather, my lord, let me admire these words, 
Than answer to your firm objections. 
His Holiness Pope Gregory the Seventh 
Hath made us four the leaders of the rest; 
Amongst the rest, my lord, I am but one. 
If they agree, Stukley will be the first 
To die with honor for Sebastian. 
Tell me, lord bishop, captains, tell me all: 
Are you content to leave this enterprise 
Against your country and your countrymen, 
To aid Mahamet King of Barbary? 
To aid Mahamet King of Barbary? 
'Tis 'gainst our vows, great King of Portugal. 
I say, my lord; as the bishop said, 
We may not turn from conquering Ireland. 
Our country and our countrymen will condemn
Us worthy of death, if we neglect our vows. 
Consider, lords, you are now in Portugal, 
And I may now dispose of you and yours. 
Hath not the wind and weather given you up, 
And made you captives at our royal will? 
It hath, my lord, and willingly we yield 
To be commanded by your majesty.  
But if you make us voluntary men, 
Our course is then direct for Ireland. 
That course will we direct for Barbary. 
Follow me, lords: Sebastian leads the way 
To plant the Christian faith in Africa. 
Saint George for England! and Ireland now adieu, 
For here Tom Stukley shapes his course anew. 
Lo, thus into a lake of blood and gore 
The brave courageous King of Portugal
Hath drenched himself, and now prepares amain 
With sails and oars to cross the swelling seas, 
With men and ships, courage and cannon-shot, 
To plant this cursed Moor in fatal hour; 
And in this Catholic case the King of Spain 
Is called upon by sweet Sebastian, 
Who, surfeiting in prime time of his youth 
Upon ambition's poison, dies thereon. 
By this time is the Moor to Tangier come, 
A city 'longing to the Portugal; 
And now doth Spain promise with holy face, 
As favoring the honor of the cause, 
His aid of arms, and levies men apace. 
But nothing less than King Sebastian's good 
He means; yet at Sucor de Tupea 
He met, some say, in person with the Portugal, 
And treateth of a marriage with the king: 
But 'ware ambitious wiles and poisoned eyes!  
There was nor aid of arms nor marriage, 
For on his way without those Spaniards 
Honorable lords, ambassadors of Spain, 
The many favors by our meetings done 
From our beloved and renowned brother, 
Say therefore, good my lord ambassador, 
Say how your mighty master minded is 
To propagate the fame of Portugal. 
To propagate the fame of Portugal, 
And plant religious truth in Africa, 
Philip the great and puissant king of Spain,  
For love and honor of Sebastian's name, 
Promiseth aid of arms, and swears by us 
To do your majesty all the good he can, 
With men, munition, and supply of war, 
Of Spaniards proud, in king Sebastian's aid, 
To spend their bloods in honor of their Christ. 
And farther, to manifest unto your majesty 
How much the Catholic king of Spain affects 
This war with Moors and men of little faith, 
The honor of your everlasting praise,  
Behold, to honor and enlarge thy name, 
He maketh offer of his daughter Isabel 
To link in marriage with the brave Sebastian; 
And to enrich Sebastian's noble wife, 
His majesty doth promise to resign 
The titles of the Islands of Moloccus, 
That by his royalty in Judah he commands. 
These favors with unfeigned love and zeal 
Voweth King Philip to King Sebastian. 
And God so deal with King Sebastian's soul  
As justly he intends to fight for Christ. 
Nobles of Spain, sith our renowned brother 
Philip, the king of honor and of zeal, 
By you, the chosen orators of Spain, 
As is the peerless dame whom we adore, 
His daughter, in whose loyalty consists 
The life and honor of Sebastian. 
As for the aid of arms he promiseth, 
We will expect and thankfully receive 
At Cardis as we sail alongst the coast. 
Honored by this meeting and this match. 
Go, lords, and follow to the famous war 
Your king; and be his fortune such in all 
As he intends to manage arms in right. 
Sit fast, Sebastian, and in this work 
God and good men labor for Portugal! 
For Spain, disguising with a double face,  
Flatters thy youth and forwardness, good king. 
Philip, whom some call the Catholic king, 
I fear me much thy faith will not be firm, 
But disagree with thy profession. 
What, then, shall of those men of war become, 
Those numbers that do multiply in Spain? 
Spain hath a vent for them and their supplies. 
The Spaniard ready to embark himself, 
Here gathers to a head; but all too sure, 
Flanders, I fear, shall feel the force of Spain.  
Let Portugal fare as he may or can, 
Spain means to spend no powder on the Moors. 
If kings do dally so with holy oaths, 
The heavens will right the wrongs that they sustain. 
Philip, if these forgeries be in thee, 
Assure thee, king, 'twill light on thee at last; 
And when proud Spain hopes soundly to prevail, 
The time may come that thou and thine shall fail. 
The Portugal, led with deceiving hope, 
Hath raised his power, and received our foe 
With honorable welcomes and regard, 
And left his country-bounds and hither bends 
In hope to help Mahamet to a crown, 
And chase us hence, and plant this Negro-Moor, 
That clads himself in coat of hammered steel, 
To heave us from the honor we possess. 
But for I have myself a soldier been, 
I have, in pity to the Portugal, 
Sent secret messengers to counsel him. 
As for the aid of Spain, whereof they hoped, 
We have dispatched our letters to their prince, 
To crave that in a quarrel so unjust, 
He that entitled is the Catholic king, 
Would not assist a careless Christian prince. 
And, as by letters we are let to know, 
Our offer of the seven holds we made 
He thankfully receives with all conditions, 
Differing in mind as far from all his words  
And promises to King Sebastian, 
As we would wish, or you, my lords, desire. 
What resteth then, but Abdelmelec may 
Beat back this proud invading Portugal 
And chastise this ambitious Negro-Moor 
With thousand deaths for thousand damned deeds? 
Forward, Zareo, and ye manly Moors! 
Sebastian, see in time unto thyself 
If thou and thine misled do thrive amiss, 
Guiltless is Abdelmelec of thy blood. 
Captains, we have received letters from the king, 
That with such signs and arguments of love 
We entertain the King of Barbary 
That marcheth toward Tangier with his men, 
The poor remainders of those that fled from Fess, 
When Abdelmelec got the glorious day, 
And 'stalled himself in his imperial throne. 
Lord Governor, we are in readiness 
To welcome and receive this hapless king, 
Chased from his land by angry Amurath; 
And if the right rest in this lusty Moor, 
Bearing a princely heart unvanquishable, 
A noble resolution then it is 
In brave Sebastian, our Christian king, 
To aid this Moor with his victorious arms, 
Thereby to propagate religious truth 
And plant his springing praise in Africa. 
But when arrives this brave Sebastian 
To knit his forces with this manly Moor, 
That both in one, and one in both, may join 
In this attempt of noble consequence? 
Our men of Tangier long to see their king, 
His princely face, that like the summer's sun, 
Glads all these hither parts of Barbary. 
Captains, he cometh hitherward amain, 
Top and top-gallant, all in brave array. 
The six-and-twentieth day of June he left 
The bay of Lisbon, and with all his fleet 
At Cardis happily he arrived in Spain 
The eighth of July, tarrying for the aid 
That Philip King of Spain had promised. 
And fifteen days he there remained aboard, 
Expecting when this Spanish force would come, 
Nor stepped ashore, as he were going still. 
But Spain, that meant and minded nothing less, 
Pretends a sudden fear and care to keep 
His own from Amurath's fierce invasion, 
And to excuse his promise to our king; 
For which he storms as great Achilles erst 
Lying for want of wind in Aulis' gulf, 
And hoiseth up his sails and anchors weighs, 
And hitherward he comes, and looks to meet 
This manly Moor whose case he undertakes. 
Therefore, go we to welcome and receive, 
With cannon-shot and shouts of young and old, 
This fleet of Portugals and troop of Moors. 
Muly Mahamet, King of Barbary, 
Well met, and welcome to our town of Tangier 
After this sudden shock and hapless war. 
Welcome, brave Queen of Moors; repose thee here, 
Thou and thy noble son. And soldiers all, 
Repose you here in King Sebastian's town. 
Thus far in honor of thy name and aid, 
Lord Mahamet, we have adventured, 
To win for thee a kingdom, for ourselves 
Fame, and performance of those promises 
That in thy faith and royalty thou hast 
Sworn to Sebastian King of Portugal; 
And thrive it so with thee as thou dost mean, 
And mean thou so as thou dost wish to thrive! 
And if our Christ, for whom in chief we fight 
Hereby to enlarge the bounds of Christendom, 
Favor this war, and, as I do not doubt, 
Send victory to light upon my crest, 
Brave Moor, I will advance thy kingly son, 
And with a diadem of pearl and gold 
Adorn thy temples and enrich thy head. 
O brave Sebastian, noble Portugal, 
Renowned and honored, ever mayst thou be 
Triumpher over those that menace thee. 
The hellish prince, grim Pluto, with his mace 
Ding down my soul to hell, and with this soul 
This son of mine, the honor of my house, 
But I perform religiously to thee 
That I have holily erst underta'en. 
And that thy lords and captains may perceive  
My mind in this single and pure to be, 
As pure as is the water of the brook, 
My dearest son to thee I do engage. 
Receive him, lord, in hostage of my vow; 
For even my mind presageth to myself, 
That in some slavish sort I shall behold 
Him dragged along this running river shore, 
A spectacle to daunt the pride of those 
That climb aloft by force, and not by right. 
Nor can it otherwise befall the man  
That keeps his seat and sceptre all in fear; 
That wears his crown in eye of all the world, 
Reputed theft and not inheritance. 
What title, then, hath Abdelmelec here 
To bar our father or his progeny? 
Right royal prince, hereof you make no doubt, 
Agreeing with your wholesome Christian laws. 
Help, then, courageous lord, with hand and sword, 
To clear his way, whose lets are lawless men. 
And for this deed ye all shall be renowned, 
Renowned and chronicled in books of fame, 
In books of fame, and characters of brass, 
Of brass, nay, beaten gold! Fight, then, for fame, 
And find the Arabian Muly Hamet here 
Adventurous, bold, and full of rich reward. 
Brave boy, how plain this princely mind in thee 
Argues the height and honor of thy birth. 
And well have I observed thy forwardness, 
Which being tendered by your majesty, 
No doubt the quarrel, opened by the mouth 
Of this young prince unpartially to us, 
May animate and hearten all the host 
To fight against the devil for Lord Mahamet. 
True, Stukley; and so freshly to my mind 
Hath this young prince reduced his father's wrong, 
That in good time I hope this honor's fire, 
Kindled already with regard of right, 
Bursts into open flames, and calls for wars, 
Wars, wars, to plant the true-succeeding prince. 
Lord Mahamet, I take thy noble son, 
A pledge of honor, and shall use him so. 
Lord Lodiwicke, and my good Lord of Avero, 
See this young prince conveyed safe to Messegon, 
And there accompanied as him fitteth best; 
And to this war prepare ye more and less, 
This rightful war, that Christians' God will bless. 
Now hardened is this hapless heathen prince, 
And strengthened by the arms of Portugal, 
This Moor, this murderer of his progeny. 
And war and weapons now, and blood and death, 
Wait on the counsels of this cursed king; 
And to a bloody banquet he invites 
The brave Sebastian and his noble peers. 
In fatal hour arrived this peerless prince, 
To lose his life, his life, and many lives 
Of lusty men, courageous Portugals, 
Let fame of him no wrongful censure sound; 
The enemy, dread lord, hath left the town 
Of Arzil with a thousand soldiers armed 
To guard his fleet of thirteen hundred sail; 
And mustering of his men before the walls, 
He found he had two thousand armed horse, 
And fourteen thousand men that serve on foot, 
Three thousand pioneers, and a thousand coachmen, 
Besides a number almost numberless 
Of drudges, Negroes, slaves, and muleteers, 
And fifteen hundred wagons full of stuff 
For noblemen brought up in delicate. 
Alas, good king, thy foresight hath been small, 
To come with women into Barbary, 
With laundresses, with baggage, and with trash, 
Numbers unfit to multiply thy host. 
Their payment in the camp is passing slow, 
And victuals scarce, that many faint and die. 
But whither marcheth he in all this haste? 
Some think, my lord, he marcheth hitherward, 
And means to take this city of Alcazar. 
Unto Alcazar? O unconstant chance! 
The brave and valiant King of Portugal 
Quarters his power in four battalions, 
Afront the which, to welcome us withal, 
Are six-and-thirty roaring pieces placed. 
The first, consisting of light-armed horse 
And of the garrisons from Tangier brought, 
Is led by Alvaro Peres de Tavero; 
The left or middle battle, of Italians 
And German horsemen, Stukley doth command, 
A warlike Englishman sent by the Pope, 
That vainly calls himself Marquis of Ireland; 
Alonso Aquilaz conducts the third, 
That wing of German soldiers most consists. 
The fourth legion is none but Portugals, 
Of whom Lodiwicke Caesar hath the chiefest charge: 
Bravely attired, pressed where need requires.  
Thus have I told your royal majesty 
How he is placed to brave us in the fight. 
But where's our nephew, Muly Mahamet? 
He marcheth in the middle, guarded about 
With full five hundred harquebuse on foot, 
And twice three thousand needless armed pikes. 
Great sovereign, vouchsafe to hear me speak, 
And let Zareo's counsel now prevail. 
Whilst time doth serve, and that these Christians dare 
Approach the field with warlike ensigns spread,  
Let us in haste with all our forces meet 
And hem them in, that not a man escape; 
So will they be advised another time 
How they do touch the shore of Barbary. 
Zareo, hear our resolution: 
And thus our forces we will first dispose. 
Hamet, my brother, with a thousand shot 
On horseback, and choice harquebusiers all, 
Having ten thousand foot with spear and shield, 
Shall make the right wing of the battle up. 
Zareo, you shall have in charge the left, 
Two thousand argolets and ten thousand horse, 
The main battle of harquebus on foot, 
And twenty thousand horsemen in their troops. 
Myself, environed with my trusty guard 
Of janissaries, fortunate in war; 
And toward Arzil will we take our way. 
If then our enemy will balk our force, 
In God's name let him, it will be his best. 
But if he level at Alcazar walls, 
Then beat him back with bullets as thick as hail, 
And make him know and rue his oversight, 
That rashly seeks the ruin of this land. 
Why, tell me, lords, why left ye Portugal, 
And crossed the seas with us to Barbary? 
Was it to see the country and no more, 
Or else to fly before ye were assailed? 
I am ashamed to think that such as you, 
Whose deeds have been renowned heretofore, 
Should slack in such an act of consequence. 
We come to fight, and fighting, vow to die 
Or else to win the thing for which we came. 
Because Abdelmelec, as pitying us,  
Sends messages to counsel quietness, 
You stand amazed, and think it sound advice, 
As if our enemy would wish us any good. 
No, let him know we scorn his courtesy, 
And will resist his forces whatsoe'er. 
Cast fear aside: myself will lead the way, 
And make a passage with my conquering sword, 
Knee-deep in blood of these accursed Moors. 
And they that love my honor, follow me. 
Were you as resolute as is your king, 
Alcazar walls should fall before your face, 
And all the force of this barbarian lord 
Should be confounded, were it ten times more. 
So well become these words a kingly mouth, 
That are of force to make a coward fight. 
Trophies of victory and kingly spoils 
Adorn his crown, his kingdom, and his fame. 
We have descried upon the mountain-tops  
A hugy company of invading Moors; 
And they, my lord, as thick as winter's hail, 
Will fall upon our heads at unawares. 
Best, then, betimes t' avoid this gloomy storm; 
It is in vain to strive with such a stream. 
Behold, thrice-noble lord, uncalled I come 
To counsel where necessity commands; 
And honor of undoubted victory 
Makes me exclaim upon this dastard flight. 
Why, King Sebastian, wilt thou now foreslow, 
And let so great a glory slip thy hands? 
Say you do march unto Larissa now: 
The forces of the foe are come so nigh, 
That he will let the passage of the river; 
So unawares, you will be forced to fight. 
But know, O king, and you, thrice-valiant lords, 
Few blows will serve. I ask but only this, 
That with your power you march into the field; 
For now is all the army resolute 
To leave the traitor helpless in the fight,  
And fly to me as to their rightful prince. 
Some horsemen have already led the way, 
And vow the like for their companions; 
The host is full of tumult and of fear. 
Then as you come to plant me in my seat, 
And to enlarge your fame in Africa, 
Now, now or never, bravely execute 
Your resolution sound and honorable, 
And end this war together with his life 
That doth usurp the crown with tyranny. 
Captains, you hear the reasons of the king, 
Which so effectually have pierced mine ears, 
That I am fully resolute to fight; 
And who refuseth now to follow me, 
Let him be ever counted cowardly. 
Shame be his share that flies when kings do fight! 
Avero lays his life before your feet. 
For my part, lords, I cannot sell my blood 
Dearer than in the company of kings. 
Now have I set these Portugals a-work 
To hew a way for me unto the crown, 
Or with your weapons here to dig your graves. 
You bastards of the night and Erebus, 
Fiends, fairies, hags that fight in beds of steel! 
Range through this army with your iron whips, 
Drive forward to this deed this Christian crew, 
And let me triumph in the tragedy, 
Though it be sealed and honored with the blood 
Both of the Portugal and barbarous Moor. 
Ride, Nemesis, ride in thy fiery cart, 
And sprinkle gore amongst these men of war, 
That either party, eager of revenge, 
May honor thee with sacrifice of death. 
And having bathed thy chariot wheels in blood, 
Descend and take to thy tormenting hell 
The mangled body of that traitor-king 
That scorns the power and force of Portugal. 
Then let the earth discover to his ghost 
Such tortures as usurpers feel below; 
Racked let him be in proud Ixion's wheel,  
Pined let him be with Tantalus' endless thirst, 
Pray let him be to Titans' greedy bird, 
Wearied with Sisyphus' immortal toil. 
And lastly for revenge, for deep revenge, 
Whereof thou goddess and deviser art, 
Damned let him be, damned, and condemned to bear 
All torments, tortures, plagues, and pains of hell. 
Ill be to him that so much ill bethinks; 
And ill betide this foul ambitious Moor, 
Whose wily trains with smoothest course of speech 
Have tied and tangled in a dangerous war 
The fierce and manly King of Portugal. 
Now throw the heavens forth their lightning-flames, 
And thunder over Afric's fatal fields. 
Blood will have blood, foul murder 'scape no scourge. 
At last descendeth Fame, as Iris [did], 
To finish fainting Dido's dying life. 
Fame from her stately bower doth descend, 
And on the tree, as fruit new-ripe to fall, 
Placeth the crowns of these unhappy kings, 
That erst she kept in eye of all the world. 
Now fiery stars and streaming comets blaze, 
That threat the earth and princes of the same. 
Fire, fire about the axletree of heaven 
Whirls round, and from the foot of Cassiope, 
In fatal hour, consumes these fatal crowns. 
The crowns of Barbary and kingdoms fall, 
Ay me, that kingdoms may not stable stand, 
And now approaching near the dismal day, 
The bloody day wherein the battles join, 
Monday the fourth of August, seventy-eight, 
The sun shines wholly on the parched earth, 
The brightest planet in the highest heaven. 
The heathens, eager bent against their foe, 
Give onset with great ord'nance to the war. 
The Christians with great noise of cannon-shot
Sound angry onsets to the enemy. 
Give ear, and hear how war begins his song 
With dreadful clamors, noise, and trumpets' sound. 
Say on, Zareo, tell me all the news, 
Tell me what Fury rangeth in our camp, 
That hath enforced our Moors to turn their backs; 
Zareo, say what chance did bode this ill, 
What ill enforced this dastard cowardice? 
My lord, such chance as willful war affords 
Such chances and misfortunes as attend 
On him, the god of battle and of arms. 
My lord, when with our ord'nance fierce, we sent 
Our Moors with smaller shot, as thick as hail, 
Follows apace, to charge the Portugal. 
The valiant duke, the devil of Avero, 
The bane of Barbary, fraughted full of ire, 
Breaks through the ranks, and with five hundred horse, 
All men-at-arms, forward and full of might, 
Assaults the middle wing, and puts to flight 
Eight thousand harquebus that served on foot, 
And twenty thousand Moors with spear and shield, 
And therewithal the honor of the day. 
Ah, Abdelmelec, dost thou live to hear 
This bitter process of this first attempt? 
Of fainting Moors, and fight it to the last. 
My horse, Zareo. O, the goal is lost, 
The goal is lost. Thou King of Portugal, 
Thrice-happy chance it is for thee and thine 
That heavens abates my strength and calls me hence. 
My sight doth fail; my soul, my feeble soul 
Shall be released from prison on this earth: 
Farewell, vain world, for I have played my part. 
Brave Abdelmelec, thou thrice-noble lord, 
Not such a wound was given to Barbary, 
Had twenty hosts of men been put to sword, 
As death, pale death, with fatal shaft hath given. 
Lo, dead is he, my brother and my king, 
Whom I might have revived with news I bring. 
His honors and his types he hath resigned 
Unto the world, and of a manly man, 
Lo, in a twinkling, a senseless stock we see! 
You trusty soldiers of this warlike king,  
Be counselled now by us in this advice; 
Let not his death be bruited in the camp, 
Lest with the sudden sorrow of the news 
The army wholly be discomfited. 
My Lord Zareo, thus I comfort you; 
Our Moors have bravely borne themselves in fight, 
Likely to get the honor of the day, 
If aught may gotten be where loss is such. 
Therefore, in this apparel as he died, 
My noble brother will we here advance, 
And set him in his chair with cunning props, 
That our Barbarians may behold their king, 
And think he doth repose him in his tent. 
Right politic and good is your advice. 
Go, then, to see it speedily performed. 
Brave lord, if Barbary recover this, 
Thy soul with joy will sit and see the fight. 
Seest thou not, Stukley, O Stukley, seest thou not 
The great dishonor done to Christendom! 
Our cheerful onset crossed in springing hope; 
The brave and mighty prince, Duke of Avero, 
Slain in my sight. Now joy betide his ghost, 
For like a lion did he bear himself! 
Our battles are all now disordered, 
And by our horses' strange retiring-back 
Our middle wing of footmen overrode. 
Stukley, alas, I see my oversight! 
False-hearted Mahamet, now, to my cost, 
I see thy treachery, warned to beware 
A face so full of fraud and villainy. 
Villain, I say, give me a horse to fly, 
To swim the river, villain, and to fly. 
Where shall I find some unfrequented place, 
Some uncouth walk, where I may curse my fill, 
My stars, my dam, my planets, and my nurse, 
The fire, the air, the water, and the earth, 
All causes that have thus conspired in one, 
To nourish and preserve me to this shame? 
Thou that wert at my birth predominate, 
Thou fatal star, what planet e'er thou be, 
Spit out thy poison bad, and all the ill 
That fortune, fate, or heaven, may bode a man. 
Thou nurse infortunate, guilty of all, 
Thou mother of my life, that brought'st me forth, 
Cursed mayst thou be for such a cursed son, 
Cursed be thy son with every curse thou hast! 
Ye elements of whom consists this clay, 
This mass of flesh, this cursed crazed corpse, 
Destroy, dissolve, disturb, and dissipate, 
These ruthless Moors pursue you at the heels 
And come amain to put you to the sword! 
That I may take the river straight and fly. 
Mount thee thereon, and save thyself by flight. 
But may I never pass the river, till I be 
Revenged upon thy soul, accursed Abdelmelec! 
If not on earth, yet when we meet in hell, 
Before grim Minos, Rhadamanth, and Eacus, 
The combat will I crave upon thy ghost, 
Of Lethes, Styx, and fiery Phlegethon. 
Stand, traitor, stand, ambitious Englishman, 
Proud Stukley, stand, and stir not ere thou die. 
Thy forwardness to follow wrongful arms, 
And leave our famous expedition erst 
Intended by his Holiness for Ireland, 
Foully hath here betrayed and tied us all 
To ruthless fury of our heathen foe. 
Thou shalt pay satisfaction with thy blood. 
Avaunt, base villains! twit ye me with shame 
Or infamy of this injurious war, 
When he that is the judge of right and wrong 
Determines battle as him pleaseth best? 
But sith my stars bode me this tragic end, 
That I must perish by these barbarous Moors, 
Whose weapons have made passage for my soul 
That breaks from out the prison of my breast; 
Ye proud malicious dogs of Italy, 
Strike on, strike down this body to the earth, 
Whose mounting mind stoops to no feeble stroke. 
Why suffer we this Englishman to live? 
Villain, bleed on; thy blood in channels run,
And meet with those whom thou to death hast done. 
Thus Stukley, slain with many a deadly stab, 
Dies in these desert fields of Africa. 
Hark, friends; and with the story of my life 
Let me beguile the torment of my death. 
In England's London, lordings, was I born, 
On that brave bridge, the bar that thwarts the Thames. 
My golden days, my younger careless years, 
Were when I touched the height of Fortune's wheel 
And lived in affluence of wealth and ease.  
Thus in my country carried long aloft, 
A discontented humor drave me thence 
To cross the seas to Ireland, then to Spain. 
There had I welcome and right royal pay 
Of Philip, whom some call the Catholic King. 
There did Tom Stukley glitter all in gold, 
Mounted upon his jennet, white as snow, 
Shining as Phoebus in King Philip's court. 
There, like a lord, famous Don Stukley lived, 
For so they called me in the court of Spain 
Till for a blow I gave a bishop's man 
A strife 'gan rise between his lord and me, 
For which we both were banished by the king. 
From thence to Rome rides Stukley all a-flaunt: 
Received with royal welcomes of the Pope. 
There was I graced by Gregory the Great, 
That then created me Marquis of Ireland. 
Short be my tale, because my life is short. 
The coast of Italy and Rome I left, 
Then was I made lieutenant-general 
Of those small forces that for Ireland went, 
And with my companies embarked at Ostia. 
My sails I spread, and with these men of war 
In fatal hour at Lisbon we arrived. 
From thence to this, to this hard exigent, 
Was Stukley driven, to fight or else to die, 
Dared to the field, that never could endure 
To hear God Mars his drum, but he must march. 
Ah, sweet Sebastian, hadst thou been well advised, 
Thou mightst have managed arms successfully!
But from our cradles we were marked all 
And destinate to die in Afric here. 
Stukley, the story of thy life is told, 
Here breathe thy last, and bid thy friends farewell. 
And if thy country's kindness be so much, 
Then let thy country kindly ring thy knell. 
Now go and in that bed of honor die, 
Where brave Sebastian's breathless corse doth lie. 
Here endeth Fortune, rule, and bitter rage;
Here ends Tom Stukley's earthly pilgrimage.  
Retreat is sounded through our camp, and now 
From battle's fury cease our conquering Moors. 
Pay thanks to heaven with sacrificing fire, 
Alcazar, and ye towns of Barbary. 
Now hast thou sit as in a trance, and seen, 
To thy soul's joy and honor of thy house, 
The trophies and the triumphs of thy men, 
Great Abdelmelec; and the god of kings 
Hath made thy war successful by thy right 
His friends, whom death and fates hath ta'en from thee. 
Lo, this was he that was the people's pride, 
And cheerful sunshine to his subjects all. 
Now have him hence, that royally he may 
Be buried and embalmed as is meet. 
Zareo, have you through the camp proclaimed 
We have, my lord, and rich rewards proposed 
For them that find the body of the king; 
For by those guard that had him in their charge 
We understand that he was done to death, 
And for his search two prisoners, Portugals, 
Are set at large to find their royal king. 
But of the traitorous Moor you hear no news 
That fled the field and sought to swim the ford? 
Not yet, my lord; but doubtless God will tell 
And with his finger point out where he haunts. 
So let it rest, and on this earth bestow 
This princely corse, Till further for his funerals 
From him to thee as true-succeeding prince,  
With all allegiance and with honor's types 
In name or all thy people and thy land, 
We give this kingly crown and diadem. 
We thank you all, and as my lawful right, 
With God's defense and yours, shall I it keep. 
As gave your grace in charge, right royal prince, 
The fields and sandy plains we have surveyed, 
And even among the thickest of his lords 
The noble King of Portugal we found, 
Wrapped in his colors coldly on the earth, 
And done to death with many a mortal wound. 
Lo, here, my lords, this is the earth and clay 
Of him that erst was mighty King of Portugal. 
There let him lie, and you for this be free 
To make return from hence to Christendom. 
Long live the mighty king of Barbary! 
Welcome, my friend. What body hast thou there? 
The body of the ambitious enemy 
That squandered all this blood in Africa, 
Whose malice sent so many souls to hell,
The traitor Muly Mahamet do I bring, 
And for thy slave I throw him at thy feet. 
Zareo, give this man a rich reward; 
And thanked be the god of just revenge, 
That he hath given our foe into our hands, 
Beastly, unarmed, slavish, full of shame, 
But say, how came this traitor to his end? 
Seeking to save his life by shameful flight, 
He mounteth on a hot Barbarian horse, 
And so in purpose to have passed the stream, 
His headstrong steed throws him from out his seat; 
Where, diving oft for lack of skill to swim, 
It was my chance alone to see him drowned, 
Whom by the heels I dragged from out the pool, 
And hither have him brought thus filed with mud. 
A death too good for such a damned wretch. 
But sith our rage and rigour of revenge 
By violence of his end prevented is, 
That all the world may learn by him to avoid 
To hale on princes to injurious war, 
His skin we will be parted from his flesh 
And being stiffened out and stuffed with straw, 
So to deter and fear the lookers-on 
From any such foul fact or bad attempt. 
And now, my lords, for this Christian king: 
My Lord Zareo, let it be your charge 
To see the soldiers tread a solemn march, 
Trailing their pikes and ensigns on the ground, 
So to perform the prince's funerals. 

