<SH5aVS> <R3 TGV LLL Jn MOV> <R3vs> Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this son of York;
And all the clouds that low'red upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments,
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, 
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged War hath smoothed his wrinkled front; 
And now, in stead of mounting barbed steeds 
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
I, that am rudely stamped, and want love's majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them --
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to see my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determined to prove a villain 
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous, 
By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams, 
To set my brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate the one against the other;
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up
About a prophecy, which says that G
Of Edward's heirs the murtherer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul, here Clarence comes!
Brother, good day. What means this armed guard
That waits upon your Grace?  His Majesty,
Tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Upon what cause?  Because my name is George.
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours; 
He should for that commit your godfathers.
O, belike his Majesty hath some intent 
That you should be new christ'ned in the Tower. 
But what's the matter, Clarence, may I know?
Yea, Richard, when I know; but I protest
As yet I do not. But, as I can learn,
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
And from the cross-row plucks the letter G,
And says a wizard told him that by G
His issue disinherited should be;
And for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These (as I learn) and such-like toys as these
Hath moved his Highness to commit me now.
Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women:
'Tis not the King that sends you to the Tower;
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
That [tempers] him to this extremity.
Was it not she, and that good man of worship,
Anthony Woodvile, her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
From whence this present day he is delivered. 
We are not safe, Clarence, we are not safe.
By heaven, I think there is no man [is] secure 
But the Queen's kindred, and night-walking heralds 
That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore.
Heard you not what an humble suppliant
Lord Hastings was [to her for his] delivery?
Humbly complaining to her deity
Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
I'll tell you what, I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favor with the King,
To be her men and wear her livery.
The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,
Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen,
Are mighty gossips in our monarchy.
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me:
His Majesty hath straitly given in charge
That no man shall have private conference
(Of what degree soever) with your brother.
Even so? And please your worship, Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no treason, man. We say the King
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen 
Well strook in years, fair, and not jealious;
We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot, 
How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.
He that doth naught with her (excepting one)
Were best to do it secretly alone.
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal
Forbear your conference with the noble Duke.
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are the Queen's abjects, and must obey.
Brother, farewell, I will unto the King,
And whatsoe'er you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edward's widow sister,
I will perform it to enfranchise you. 
Mean time, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine. 
I know it pleaseth neither of us well. 
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long,
I will deliver you, or else lie for you.
Mean time, have patience.  I must perforce. Farewell.
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return:
Simple plain Clarence, I do love thee so
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? the new-delivered Hastings?
Good time of day unto my gracious lord!
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain!
Well are you welcome to [the] open air.
How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must;
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment. 
No doubt, no doubt, and so shall Clarence too, 
For they that were your enemies are his, 
And have prevailed as much on him as you.
More pity that the eagles should be mewed,
Whiles kites and buzzards [prey] at liberty.
No news so bad abroad as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.
Now by Saint John, that news is bad indeed!
O, he hath kept an evil diet long,
And overmuch consumed his royal person:
'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die
Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven.
I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence
With lies well steeled with weighty arguments,
And if I fail not in my deep intent, 
Clarence hath not another day to live:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy, 
And leave the world for me to bustle in! 
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
What though I killed her husband and her father?
The readiest way to make the wench amends
Is to become her husband and her father:
The which will I, not all so much for love
As for another secret close intent
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market:
Clarence still breathes, Edward still lives and reigns;
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
Set down, set down your honorable load,
If honor may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
Th' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king, 
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster,
Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood, 
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost 
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaught'red son,
Stabbed by the self-same hand that made these wounds!
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life
I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
O, cursed be the hand that made these holes!
Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it!
Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
More direful hap betide that hated wretch 
That makes us wretched by the death of thee
Than I can wish to wolves -- to spiders, toads, 
Or any creeping venomed thing that lives! 
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
And that be heir to his unhappiness!
If ever he have wife, let her be made
More miserable by the [life] of him
Than I am made by my young lord and thee!
Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
And still as you are weary of this weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
What black magician conjures up this fiend
To stop devoted charitable deeds?
Villains, set down the corse, or, by Saint Paul,
I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.
My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.
Unmannered dog, [stand] thou when I command. 
Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,
Or by Saint Paul I'll strike thee to my foot,
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
What do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil. --
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
His soul thou canst not have. Therefore be gone.
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
Foul devil, for God's sake hence, and trouble us not,
For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,
Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
O gentlemen, see, see dead Henry's wounds
Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!
Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity;
For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood 
From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.
Thy deeds inhuman and unnatural 
Provokes this deluge most unnatural. 
O God! which this blood mad'st, revenge his death!
O earth! which this blood drink'st, revenge his death!
Either heav'n with lightning strike the murth'rer dead;
Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood,
Which his hell-governed arm hath butchered!
Lady, you know no rules of charity,
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
Villain, thou know'st nor law of God nor man:
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposed crimes, to give me leave
By circumstance but to acquit myself.
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
Of these known evils, but to give me leave
By circumstance [t' accuse] thy cursed self. 
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have 
Some patient leisure to excuse myself. 
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
No excuse current but to hang thyself.
By such despair I should accuse myself.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excused
For doing worthy vengeance on thyself,
That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.
I did not kill your husband.  Why then he is alive.
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward's hands.
In thy foul throat thou li'st! Queen Margaret saw
Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood;
The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
I was provoked by her sland'rous tongue,
That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders. 
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind,
That never dream'st on aught but butcheries. 
Didst thou not kill this king?  I grant ye.
Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then God grant me too
Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!
O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!
The better for the King of Heaven that hath him.
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
Let him thank me that holp to send him thither;
For he was fitter for that place than earth.
And thou unfit for any place, but hell.
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
So will it, madam, till I lie with you.
I hope so.  I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits 
And fall something into a slower method: 
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blameful as the executioner?
Thou wast the cause, and most accursed effect.
Your beauty was the cause of that effect --
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
These nails should rent that beauty from my cheeks.
These eyes could not endure that beauty's wrack;
You should not blemish it, if I stood by:
As all the world is cheered by the sun,
So I by that; it is my day, my life.
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!
Curse not thyself, fair creature -- thou art both. 
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
It is a quarrel most unnatural, 
To be revenged on him that loveth thee. 
It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be revenged on him that killed my husband.
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,
Did it to help thee to a better husband.
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
He lives, that loves thee better than he could.
Name him.  Plantagenet.  Why, that was he.
The self-same name, but one of better nature.
Where is he?   Here.  Why dost thou spit at me?
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake!
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Out of my sight, thou dost infect mine eyes!
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead! 
I would they were, that I might die at once;
For now they kill me with a living death. 
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, 
Shamed their aspects with store of childish drops:
These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear --
No, when my father York and Edward wept
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the sad story of my father's death,
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
Like trees bedashed with rain -- in that sad time
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear.
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
I never sued to friend nor enemy;
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lip such scorn; for it was made
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt. 
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, 
Which if thou please to hide in this true breast, 
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pause: for I did kill King Henry --
But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
Nay, now dispatch: 'twas I that stabbed young Edward --
But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.
Arise, dissembler! Though I wish thy death,
I will not be thy executioner.
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
I have already.  That was in thy rage.
Speak it again, and even with the word
This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,
Shall for thy love kill a far truer love; 
To both their deaths shalt thou be accessary.
Look how my ring encompasseth thy finger,
Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart:
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted servant may
But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.
That it may please you leave these sad designs
To him that hath most cause to be a mourner, 
And presently repair to Crosby House;
Where (after I have solemnly interred 
At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king, 
And wet his grave with my repentant tears)
I will with all expedient duty see you.
For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,
With all my heart, and much it joys me too,
To see you are become so penitent.
Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
Bid me farewell.  'Tis more than you deserve;
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.
Sirs, take up the corse.  Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
No; to White-Friars, there attend my coming.         
Was ever woman in this humor wooed?
Was ever woman in this humor won?
I'll have her, but I will not keep her long.
What? I, that killed her husband and his father,
To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of my hatred by,
Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,
And I no friends to back my suit [at all]
But the plain devil and dissembling looks?
And yet to win her! All the world to nothing!
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,
Framed in the prodigality of nature --
Young, valiant, wise, and (no doubt) right royal --
The spacious world cannot again afford.
And will she yet abase her eyes on me, 
That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince
And made her widow to a woeful bed? 
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moi'ty? 
On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
I do mistake my person all this while!
Upon my life, she finds (although I cannot)
Myself to be a marv'llous proper man.
I'll be at charges for a looking-glass,
And entertain a score or two of tailors
To study fashions to adorn my body:
Since I am crept in favor with myself,
I will maintain it with some little cost.
But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave,
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.      
Have patience, madam, there's no doubt his Majesty 
Will soon recover his accustomed health.
In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse; 
Therefore for God's sake entertain good comfort, 
And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes.
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
The heavens have blest you with a goodly son
To be your comforter when he is gone.
Ah! he is young; and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.
Is it concluded he shall be Protector?
It is determined, not concluded yet;
But so it must be, if the King miscarry.
Here [come] the [lords] of Buckingham and Derby.
Good time of day unto your royal Grace!
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been!
The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby, 
To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
I do beseech you, either not believe
The envious slanders of her false accusers;
Or if she be accused on true report,
Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
Saw you the King today, my Lord of Derby?
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Are come from visiting his Majesty.
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?
Madam, good hope, his Grace speaks cheerfully.
God grant him health! Did you confer with him?
Ay, madam, he desires to make atonement
Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers, 
And between them and my Lord Chamberlain,
And sent to warn them to his royal presence. 
Would all were well! but that will never be:
I fear our happiness is at the height.
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it!
Who is it that complains unto the King
That I, forsooth, am stern, and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors.
Because I cannot flatter and look fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous enemy.
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused
With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?
To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace:
When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong? 
Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all! His royal Grace 
(Whom God preserve better than you would wish!) 
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter:
The King, on his own royal disposition
(And not provoked by any suitor else),
Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred,
That in your outward action shows itself
Against my children, brothers, and myself,
Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.
I cannot tell, the world is grown so bad
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.
Since every Jack became a gentleman,
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester;
You envy my advancement and my friends'.
God grant we never may have need of you!
Mean time, God grants that I have need of you. 
Our brother is imprisoned by your means,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility 
Held in contempt, while great promotions 
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.
By Him that raised me to this careful height
From that contented hap which I enjoyed,
I never did incense his Majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
You may deny that you were not the mean
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
She may, Lord Rivers! Why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, than denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her aiding hand therein
And lay those honors on your high desert.
What may she not, she may, ay, marry, may she. 
What, marry, may she? Marry with a king, 
A bachelor, and a handsome stripling too: 
Iwis your grandam had a worser match.
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.
By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
Of those gross taunts that oft I have endured.
I had rather be a country servant maid
Than a great queen with this condition,
To be so baited, scorned, and stormed at.
Small joy have I in being England's queen.
And less'ned be that small, God I beseech him!
Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
What? threat you me with telling of the King?
[Tell him, and spare not. Look what I have said,]
I will avouch't in presence of the King.
I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tow'r.
'Tis time to speak, my pains are quite forgot. 
Out, devil! I do remember them too well: 
Thou kill'dst my husband Henry in the Tower, 
And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.
Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,
I was a pack-horse in his great affairs:
A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his friends;
To royalize his blood I spent mine own.
Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
In all which time you and your husband Grey
Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband
In Margaret's battle at Saint Albons slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
What you have been ere this, and what you are;
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
A murth'rous villain, and so still thou art.
Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick,
Ay, and forswore himself -- which Jesu pardon! -- 
To fight on Edward's party for the crown,
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.
I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's,
Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine:
I am too childish-foolish for this world.
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave this world,
Thou cacodemon, there thy kingdom is.
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days,
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We followed then our lord, our sovereign king.
So should we you, if you should be our king.
If I should be? I had rather be a pedlar:
Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof!
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this country's king --
As little joy you may suppose in me
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
A little joy enjoys the queen thereof, 
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
I can no longer hold me patient.   
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out 
In sharing that which you have pilled from me!
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects,
Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels?
Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away!
Foul wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my sight?
But repetition of what thou hast marred,
That will I make before I let thee go.
Wert thou not banished on pain of death?
I was; but I do find more pain in banishment
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
A husband and a son thou ow'st to me --
And thou a kingdom -- all of you allegiance.
This sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
The curse my noble father laid on thee
When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper,
And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
And then, to dry them, gav'st the Duke a clout 
Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland --
His curses then, from bitterness of soul 
Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee; 
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
So just is God, to right the innocent.
O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
And the most merciless, that e'er was heard of!
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
What? were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
Their kingdom's loss, my woeful banishment,
Should all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why then give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
Though not by war, by surfeit die your king, 
As ours by murther, to make him a king!
Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales, 
For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales, 
Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory like my wretched self!
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's death,
And see another, as I see thee now,
Decked in thy rights as thou art stalled in mine!
Long die thy happy days before thy death,
And after many length'ned hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen!
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabbed with bloody daggers: God, I pray him
That none of you may live his natural age,
But by some unlooked accident cut off!
Have done thy charm, thou hateful with'red hag.
And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee, 
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation 
On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace! 
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv'st,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be while some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb!
Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins!
Margaret.   Richard!   Ha!  I call thee not.
I cry thee mercy then; for I did think
That thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.
O, let me make the period to my curse! 
'Tis done by me, and ends in "Margaret."
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself. 
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!
Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool, thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
The day will come that thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-backed toad.
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
Dispute not with her, she is lunatic.
Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert, 
Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current.
O that your young nobility could judge 
What 'twere to lose it and be miserable! 
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Good counsel, marry! Learn it, learn it, Marquess.
It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
Ay, and much more; but I was born so high,
Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
And turns the sun to shade -- alas, alas!
Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest:
O God that seest it, do not suffer it!
As it is won with blood, lost be it so!
Peace, peace, for shame! if not, for charity.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me.
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully my hopes, by you, are butchered. 
My charity is outrage, life my shame,
And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage! 
O princely Buckingham, I'll kiss thy hand
In sign of league and amity with thee.
Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood;
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
Nor no one here; for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
I will not think but they ascend the sky,
And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
Look when he fawns he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death.
Have not to do with him, beware of him;
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from? 
O but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, 
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess! 
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to God's!    
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
And so doth mine. I muse why she's at liberty.
I cannot blame her; by God's holy Mother,
She hath had too much wrong, and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.
I never did her any to my knowledge.
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to do somebody good
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;
He is franked up to fatting for his pains --
God pardon them that are the cause thereof!
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion --
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
So do I ever --  being well advised;
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself. 
Madam, his Majesty doth call for you, 
And for your Grace, and yours, my gracious lord. 
Catesby, I come. Lords, will you go with me?
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, who I indeed have cast in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple gulls --
Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham --
And tell them 'tis the Queen and her allies
That stir the King against the Duke my brother.
Now they believe it, and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey.
But then I sigh, and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I clothe my naked villainy
With odd old ends stol'n forth of holy writ,
And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.
But soft, here come my executioners.
How now, my hardy, stout, resolved mates, 
Are you now going to dispatch this thing? 
We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant,
That we may be admitted where he is.
Well thought upon, I have it here about me.
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers. Be assured;
We go to use our hands, and not our tongues.
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes fall tears.
I like you, lads, about your business straight.
Go, go, dispatch.  We will, my noble lord. 
Why looks your Grace so heavily today? 
O, I have passed a miserable night,
So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days --
So full of dismal terror was the time.
What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower
And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,
And in my company my brother Gloucester,
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches. [Thence] we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand heavy times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster,
That had befall'n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling 
Strook me (that thought to stay him) overboard
Into the tumbling billows of the main. 
Lord, methought what pain it was to drown! 
What dreadful noise of [waters] in [my] ears!
What sights of ugly death within [my] eyes!
Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks;
A thousand men that fishes gnawed upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scatt'red in the bottom of the sea:
Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept
(As 'twere in scorn of eyes) reflecting gems,
That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mocked the dead bones that lay scatt'red by.
Had you such leisure in the time of death 
To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?
Methought I had, and often did I strive 
To yield the ghost; but still the envious flood 
Stopped in my soul, and would not let it forth
To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air,
But smothered it within my panting bulk,
Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
Awaked you not in this sore agony?
No, no, my dream was lengthened after life.
O then began the tempest to my soul!
I passed (methought) the melancholy flood,
With that sour ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
Who spake aloud, "What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?"
And so he vanished. Then came wand'ring by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud,
"Clarence is come -- false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabbed me in the field by Tewksbury:
Seize on him, Furies, take him unto torment!" 
With that ([methoughts]) a legion of foul fiends
Environed me, and howled in mine ears 
Such hideous cries that with the very noise 
I, trembling, waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made my dream.
No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you;
I am afraid (methinks) to hear you tell it.
Ah, Keeper, Keeper, I have done these things
(That now give evidence against my soul)
For Edward's sake, and see how he requites me!
O God! if my deep pray'rs cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone!
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile.
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest! 
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning and the noontide night:
Princes have but their titles for their glories, 
An outward honor for an inward toil,
And for unfelt imaginations 
They often feel a world of restless cares; 
So that between their titles and low name
There's nothing differs but the outward fame.
What wouldst thou, fellow? and how cam'st thou hither?
I am in this commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
There lies the Duke asleep, and there the keys.
I'll to the King and signify to him
That thus I have resigned to you my charge. 
No, he'll say 'twas done cowardly when he wakes.
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
Offended us you have not, but the King.
I shall be reconciled to him again.
Never, my lord, therefore prepare to die.
Are you drawn forth among a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offense?
Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced 
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?
Before I be convict by course of law, 
To threaten me with death is most unlawful. 
I charge you, as you hope [to have redemption
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,]
That you depart, and lay no hands on me.
The deed you undertake is damnable.
What we will do, we do upon command.
And he that hath commanded is our King.
Erroneous vassals, the great King of kings
Hath in the table of his law commanded
That thou shalt do no murther. Will you then
Spurn at his edict, and fulfill a man's?
Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hand,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee
For false forswearing and for murther too.
Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight
In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
And like a traitor to the name of God
Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade
Unrip'st the bowels of thy sov'reign's son. 
Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and defend. 
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us,
When thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murther me for this,
For in that sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be avenged for the deed,
O, know you yet he doth it publicly.
Take not the quarrel from his pow'rful arm;
He needs no indirect or lawless course
To cut off those that have offended him.
Who made thee then a bloody minister,
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy faults
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
[O,] if you love my brother, hate not me!
I am his brother and I love him well. 
If you are hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, 
Who shall reward you better for my life 
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.
O no; he loves me and he holds me dear.
Go you to him from me.  Ay, so we will.
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Blest his three sons with his victorious arm,
[And charged us from his soul to love each other,]
He little thought of this divided friendship.
Bid Gloucester think [of] this, and he will weep.
Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,
And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs
That he would labor my delivery.
Why, so he doth, when he delivers you 
From this earth's thralldom to the joys of heaven.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord. 
Have you that holy feeling in your souls
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your own souls so blind
That you will war with God by murd'ring me?
O, sirs, consider, they that set you on
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
What shall we do?  Relent, and save your souls.
Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
Being pent from liberty, as I am now,
If two such murtherers as yourselves came to you, 
Relent? No: 'tis cowardly and womanish. 
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. 
My friend I spy some pity in thy looks.
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
As you would beg, were you in my distress.
A begging prince what beggar pities not?
Take that! and that!   If all this will not do,
I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched!
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
How now? what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
By [heavens), the Duke shall know how slack you have been!
I would he knew that I had saved his brother! 
Take thou the fee and tell him what I say,
For I repent me that the Duke is slain.    
So do not I.  Go, coward as thou art.
Well, I'll go hide the body in some hole
Till that the Duke give order for his burial;
And when I have my meed, I will away,
For this will out, and then I must not stay.  
Why, so: now have I done a good day's work.
You peers, continue this united league.
I every day expect an embassage
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
And more [in] peace my soul shall part to heaven, 
Since I have made my friends at peace on earth.
[Hastings] and Rivers, take each other's hand, 
Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love. 
By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate,
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
Take heed you dally not before your king,
Lest He that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood and award
Either of you to be the other's end.
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
Madam, yourself is not exempt from this;
Nor you, son Dorset; Buckingham, nor you;
You have been factious one against the other.
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand,
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
There, Hastings, I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine! 
Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love Lord Marquess. 
This interchange of love, I here protest, 
Upon my part shall be inviolable.
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wive's allies,
And make me happy in your unity.
When ever Buckingham doth turn his hate
Upon your Grace but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love!
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile
Be he unto me! This do I beg of [God],
When I am cold in love to you or yours.
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here 
To make the blessed period of this peace.
Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the Duke. 
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen,
And, princely peers, a happy time of day!
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day.
Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity,
Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.
A blessed labor, my most sovereign lord.
Among this princely heap, if any here
By false intelligence or wrong surmise
If I [unwittingly], or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
[By] any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace.
'Tis death to me to be at enmity;
I hate it, and desire all good men's love.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service; 
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us; 
Of you, and you, Lord Rivers, and of Dorset, 
That all without desert have frowned on me;
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen -- indeed of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born tonight.
I thank my God for my humility.
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter.
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
Why, madam, have I off'red love for this,
To be so flouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Who knows not he is dead? Who knows he is?
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
Ay, my good lord, and no man in the presence 
But his red color hath forsook his cheeks.
Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed. 
But he, poor man, by your first order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear;
Some tardy cripple bare the countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, [but] not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion!
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!
I prithee peace, my soul is full of sorrow.
I will not rise, unless your Highness hear me.
Then say at once what is it thou requests.
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life,
Who slew today a riotous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
Have I a tongue to doom my brother's death,
And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave? 
My brother killed no man, his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was bitter death. 
Who sued to me for him? Who (in my wrath) 
Kneeled [at] my feet and bid me be advised?
Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field at Tewksbury,
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said, "Dear brother, live, and be a king"?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen (almost) to death, how he did lap me
Even in his [own] garments, and did give himself
(All thin and naked) to the numb cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,
And I (unjustly too) must grant it you. 
But for my brother not a man would speak, 
Nor I (ungracious) speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all 
Have been beholding to him in his life; 
Yet none of you would once beg for his life.
O God! I fear thy justice will take hold
On me and you, and mine and yours, for this.
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet. Ah, poor Clarence! 
This is the fruits of rashness! Marked you not
How that the guilty kindred of the Queen
Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
O, they did urge it still unto the King!
God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go
To comfort Edward with our company.
Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead? 
Why do [you] weep so oft, and beat your breast, 
And cry "O Clarence my unhappy son!"?
Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,
If that our noble father were alive?
My pretty cousins, you mistake me both:
I do lament the sickness of the King,
As loath to lose him, not your father's death;
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
Then you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.
The King mine uncle is to blame for it.
God will revenge it, whom I will importune
With earnest prayers all to that effect.
Peace, children, peace, the King doth love you well.
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your father's death.
Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me the King, provoked to it by the Queen, 
Devised impeachments to imprison him;
And when my uncle told me so, he wept, 
And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek; 
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as a child.
Ah! that deceit should steal such gentle shape,
And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice!
He is my son -- ay, and therein my shame,
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?
Ah! who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
I'll join with black despair against my soul,
And to myself become an enemy.
What means this scene of rude impatience?
To make an act of tragic violence.
Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead!
Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the King's,
Or like obedient subjects follow him 
To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
Ah, so much interest have [I] in thy sorrow 
As I had title in thy noble husband! 
I have bewept a worthy husband's death,
And lived with looking on his images;
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are cracked in pieces by malignant death,
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
That grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left;
But death hath snatched my husband from mine arms,
And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands,
Clarence and Edward. O, what cause have I
(Thine being but a moi'ty of my moan)
To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
Ah, aunt! you wept not for our father's death;
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned,
Your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!
Give me no help in lamentation,
I am not barren to bring forth complaints.
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, 
That I being governed by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world! 
Ah for my husband, for my dear Lord Edward! 
Ah for our father, for our dear Lord Clarence!
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
What stay had I but Edward? and he's gone.
What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.
What stays had I but they? and they are gone.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
Was never mother had so dear a loss.
Alas! I am the mother of these griefs:
Their woes are parcelled, mine is general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
I for a Clarence [weep], so doth not she;
These babes for Clarence weep, [and so do I;
I for an Edward weep,] so do not they.
Alas! you three on me, threefold distressed,
Pour all your tears. I am your sorrow's nurse, 
And I will pamper it with lamentation.
Comfort, dear mother, God is much displeased 
That you take with unthankfulness his doing. 
In common worldly things 'tis called ungrateful
With dull unwillingness to repay a debt,
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Madam, bethink you like a careful mother
Of the young Prince your son. Send straight for him,
Let him be crowned, in him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.
Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star;
But none can help our harms by wailing them.
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy,
I did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty! 
Amen! --  and make me die a good old man!
That is the butt-end of a mother's blessing.
I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers
That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each other's love.
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates,
But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,
Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept.
Me seemeth good that, with some little train,
Forthwith from Ludlow the young Prince be fet
Hither to London, to be crowned our king.
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?
Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude
The new-healed wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous, 
By how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned.
Where every horse bears his commanding rein 
And may direct his course as please himself, 
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
I hope the King made peace with all of us,
And the compact is firm and true in me.
And so in me, and so (I think) in all.
Yet since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged;
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.
Then be it so, and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to [Ludlow].
Madam, and you, my sister, will you go
To give your censures in this business?
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For God sake let not us two stay at home;
For by the way, I'll sort occasion, 
As index to the story we late talked of,
To part the Queen's proud kindred from the Prince. 
My other self, my counsel's consistory, 
My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,
I, as a child, will go by thy direction.
Toward [Ludlow] then, for we'll not stay behind.
Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
I promise you, I scarcely know myself.
Ill news, by'r lady -- seldom comes the better.
I fear, I fear 'twill prove a giddy world.
Neighbors, God speed!  Give you good morrow, sir. 
Doth the news hold of good King Edward's death? 
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while! 
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
No, no, by God's good grace his son shall reign.
Woe to that land that's governed by a child!
In him there is a hope of government,
Which in his nonage, council under him,
And in his full and ripened years, himself,
No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
So stood the state when Henry the Sixt
Was crowned in Paris but at nine months old.
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends.  God wot,
For then this land was famously enriched
With politic grave counsel; then the King
Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
Why, so hath this, both by his father and mother.
Better it were they all came by his father,
Or by his father there were none at all; 
For emulation who shall now be nearest
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not. 
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester, 
And the Queen's sons and brothers haught and proud!
Come, come, we fear the worst; all will be  well.
When clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms makes men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but if God sort it so,
'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.
You cannot reason (almost) with a man
That looks not heavily and full of dread.
Before the days of change, still is it so.
By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust
Ensuing danger; as by proof we see
The water swell before a boist'rous storm.
But leave it all to God. Whither away? 
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
And so was I. I'll bear you company. 
Last night, I [hear], they lay at Stony-Stratford,
And at Northampton they do rest tonight.
tomorrow, or next day, they will be here.
I long with all my heart to see the prince.
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
But I hear no; they say my son of York
Has almost o'erta'en him in his growth.
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
Why, my good cousin, it is good to grow.
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow
More than my brother.  "Ay," quoth my uncle Gloucester, 
"Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace."
And since, methinks I would not grow so fast, 
Because sweet flow'rs are slow and weeds make haste. 
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee:
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely
That if his rule were true, he should be gracious.
And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
Now by my troth, if I had been rememb'red,
I could have given my uncle's Grace a flout,
To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.
How, my young York? I prithee let me hear it.
Marry (they say) my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old;
'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
His nurse? why, she was dead ere thou wast born. 
If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me. 
A parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
How doth the Prince?  Well, madam, and in health.
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
And with them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
Who hath committed them?  The mighty dukes,
Gloucester and Buckingham.  For what offense?
The sum of all I can I have disclosed.
Why, or for what, the nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
Ay me! I see the ruin of my house:
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind; 
Insulting tyranny begins to jut
Upon the innocent and aweless throne. 
Welcome destruction, blood, and massacre! 
I see (as in a map) the end of all.
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
My husband lost his life to get the crown,
And often up and down my sons were tossed
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss;
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean overblown, themselves, the conquerors,
Make war upon themselves, brother to brother,
Blood to blood, self against self. O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen,
Or let me die, to look on [death] no more!
Come, come, my boy, we will to sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.  Stay, I will go with you.
You have no cause.  My gracious lady, go,
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, I'll resign unto your Grace
The seal I keep, and so betide to me 
As well I tender you and all of yours!
Go, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.   
Welcome, sweet Prince, to London, to your chamber.
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign,
The weary way hath made you melancholy.
No, uncle, but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.
I want more uncles here to welcome me.
Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit;
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show, which, God he knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous; 
Your Grace attended to their sug'red words,
But looked not on the poison of their hearts. 
God keep you from them, and from such false friends! 
God keep me from false friends! -- but they were none.
My lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.
God bless your Grace with health and happy days!
I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.     
I thought my mother and my brother York
Would long ere this have met us on the way.
Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!
And in good time, here comes the sweating lord.
Welcome, my lord.  What, will our mother come?
On what occasion, God he knows, not I, 
The Queen your mother and your brother York
Have taken sanctuary. The tender Prince 
Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace, 
But by his mother was perforce withheld.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers! Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary! Not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
You are too senseless-obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional.
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted 
To those whose dealings have deserved the place
And those who have the wit to claim the place. 
This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it, 
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men,
But sanctuary children never till now.
My lord, you shall overrule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may. 
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower;
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.
I do not like the Tower, of any place.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord? 
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified. 
Is it upon record, or else reported 
Successively from age to age, he built it?
But say, my lord, it were not regist'red,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As 'twere retailed to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.
So wise so young, they say do never live long.
I say, without characters fame lives long.
Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,
I moralize two meanings in one word.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
With what his valor did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valure live.
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,
For now he lives in fame though not in life.
I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham --
And if I live until I be a man, 
I'll win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier as I lived a king. 
Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
Now in good time, here comes the Duke of York.
Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
Well, my dread lord -- so must I call you now.
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours.
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
I thank you, gentle uncle. O my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth:
The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
He hath, my lord.  And therefore is he idle?
O my fair cousin, I must not say so.
Then he is more beholding to you than I.
He may command me as my sovereign, 
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger. 
My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart. 
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.
A greater gift? O, that's the sword to it.
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
O then I see you will part but with light gifts!
In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk.
Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me. 
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me:
Because that I am little, like an ape, 
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders. 
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning and so young is wonderful.
My lord, will't please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
My Lord Protector needs will have it so.
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost.
My grandam told me he was murd'red there.
And if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come, my lord; with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower. 
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtile mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt. O, 'tis a perilous boy,
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable:
He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.
Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
As closely to conceal what we impart.
Thou know'st our reasons urged upon the way;
What think'st thou? Is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind
For the installment of this noble Duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?
He for his father's sake so loves the Prince
That he will not be won to aught against him.
What think'st thou then of Stanley? Will not he?
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings 
How he doth stand affected to our purpose, 
And summon him tomorrow to the Tower
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reasons;
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling
Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
And give us notice of his inclination;
For we tomorrow hold divided Councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,
And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,
Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
My good lords both, with all the heed I can. 
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep? 
At Crosby House, there shall you find us both. 
Now, my lord, what shall we do if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Chop off his head! Something we will determine.
And look when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Herford, and all the moveables
Whereof the King my brother was possessed.
I'll claim that promise at your Grace's hand.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.  
My lord! my lord!  Who knocks?  One from the Lord Stanley. 
What is't a' clock?  Upon the stroke of four. 
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
So it appears by that I have to say:
First, he commends him to your noble self.
Then certifies your lordship that this night
He dreamt the boar had rased off his helm.
Besides, he says there are two Councils kept;
And that may be determined at the one
Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.
Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure,
If you will presently take horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the north,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord,
Bid him not fear the separated Council:
His honor and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my good friend Catesby;
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us 
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance; 
And for his dreams, I wonder he's so simple 
To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.
To fly the boar before the boar pursues
Were to incense the boar to follow us,
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where he shall see the boar will use us kindly.
I'll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.
Many good morrows to my noble lord!
Good morrow, Catesby, you are early stirring.
What  news, what news, in this our tott'ring state?
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,
And I believe will never stand upright
Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
How? wear the garland? Dost thou mean the crown?
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders 
Before I'll see the crown so foul misplaced. 
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof;
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.
Indeed I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still my adversaries;
But that I'll give my voice on Richard's side
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death!
God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!
But I shall laugh at this a twelvemonth hence,
That they which brought me in my master's hate,
I live to look upon their tragedy.
Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older,
I'll send some packing that yet think not on't.
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, 
When men are unprepared and look not for it.
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out 
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so 'twill do 
With some men else, that think themselves as safe
As thou and I, who (as thou know'st) are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
The princes both make high account of you --
For they account his head upon the bridge.
I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on, where is your boar-spear man?
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
My lord, good morrow, good morrow, Catesby.
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
I do not like these several Councils, I.
I hold my life as dear as [you do] yours,
And never in my days, I do protest,
Was it so precious to me as 'tis now.
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund, and supposed their states were sure, 
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust; 
But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.
This sudden stab of rancor I misdoubt;
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.
Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
today the lords you [talked] of are beheaded.
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
Go on before, I'll talk with this good fellow.
How now, sirrah? how goes the world with thee?
The better that your lordship please to ask.
I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
Than when thou met'st me last where now we meet.
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the Queen's allies; 
But now I tell thee (keep it to thyself)
This day those enemies are put to death, 
And I in better state than e'er I was. 
God hold it, to your honor's good content!
Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.
Well met, my lord, I am glad to see your honor.
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.
What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest,
Your honor hath no shriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man 
The men you talk of came into my mind.
I do, my lord, but long I cannot stay there. 
I shall return before your lordship thence.
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
And supper too, although thou know'st it not. --
Come, will you go?  I'll wait upon your lordship. 
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this:
today shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
God bless the Prince from all the pack of you!
A knot you are of damned blood-suckers. 
You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter. 
Dispatch, the limit of your lives is out. 
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison!
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the Second here was hacked to death;
And for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.
Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads,
When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I,
For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God,
To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste, the hour of death is expiate.
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us here embrace. 
Farewell, until we meet again in heaven.   
Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met
Is to determine of the coronation.
In God's name speak, when is the royal day?
Is all things ready for the royal time?
It is, and wants but nomination.
tomorrow then I judge a happy day.
Who knows the Lord Protector's mind herein?
Who is most inward with the noble Duke?
Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
We know each other's faces; for our hearts,
He knows no more of mine than I of yours,
Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
I thank his Grace, I know he loves me well; 
But for his purpose in the coronation,
I have not sounded him, nor he delivered 
His gracious pleasure any way therein. 
But you, my honorable lords, may name the time,
And in the Duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which I presume he'll take in gentle part.
In happy time, here comes the Duke himself.
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
I have been long a sleeper; but I trust
My absence doth neglect no great design,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.
Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,
I mean your voice for crowning of the King.
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder,
His lordship knows me well and loves me well.
My Lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn,
I saw good strawberries in your garden there.
I do beseech you send for some of them.
Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart. 
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you. 
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy gentleman so hot
That he will lose his head ere give consent
His master's child, as worshipfully he terms it, 
Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.
Withdraw yourself a while, I'll go with you. 
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
tomorrow, in my judgment, is too sudden,
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester?
His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning;
There's some conceit or other likes him well,
When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.
I think there's never a man in Christendom
Can lesser hide his love or hate than he,
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any livelihood he showed today?
Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
For were he, he had shown it in his looks.
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve 
That do conspire my death with devilish plots 
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevailed
Upon my body with their hellish charms?
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this princely presence
To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be:
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.
Look how I am bewitched; behold, mine arm
Is like a blasted sapling, withered up;
And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord --
If? Thou protector of this damned strumpet,
Talk'st thou to me of "ifs"? Thou art a traitor.
Off with his head! Now by Saint Paul I swear
I will not dine until I see the same.
Lovel and Ratcliffe, look that it be done:
The rest that love me, rise, and follow me.
Woe, woe for England, not a whit for me! 
For I, too fond, might have prevented this. 
Stanley did dream the boar did [rase] our helms,
And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.
Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And started when he looked upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O now I need the priest that spake to me!
I now repent I told the pursuivant,
As too triumphing, how mine enemies
today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,
And I myself secure, in grace and favor.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head!
Come, come, dispatch, the Duke would be at dinner.
Make a short shrift, he longs to see your head.
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in air of your good looks
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down 
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Come, come, dispatch, 'tis bootless to exclaim. 
O bloody Richard! Miserable England!
I prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee
That ever wretched age hath looked upon.
Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
They smile at me who shortly shall be dead. 
Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy color,
Murther thy breath in middle of a word,
And then again begin, and stop again,
As if thou were distraught and mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw;
Intending deep suspicion, ghastly looks 
Are at my service, like enforced smiles;
And both are ready in their offices 
At any time to grace my stratagems. 
He is, and see, he brings the Mayor along.
Look back, defend thee, here are enemies!
God and our [innocence] defend and guard us!
Be patient, they are friends -- Ratcliffe and Lovel.
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the man that I must weep.
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
That breathed upon the earth a Christian; 
Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts. 
So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue 
That, his apparent open guilt omitted --
I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife --
He lived from all attainder of suspects.
Well, well, he was the covert'st shelt'red traitor
That ever lived. [Look ye, my Lord Mayor,]
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were't not that by great preservation
We live to tell it, that the subtile traitor
This day had plotted, in the Council-house,
To murther me and my good Lord of Gloucester?
What? think you we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly in the villain's death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England, and our persons' safety,
Enforced us to this execution?
Now fair be fall you! he deserved his death,
And your good Graces both have well proceeded, 
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
I never looked for better at his hands 
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore. 
Yet had we not determined he should die
Until your lordship came to see his end,
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Something against our meanings, have prevented;
Because, my lord, I would have had you heard
The traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treasons,
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconster us in him and wail his death.
But, my good lord, your Grace's words shall serve
As well as I had seen, and heard him speak;
And do not doubt, right noble princes both,
But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this [cause].
And to that end we wished your lordship here,
T' avoid the censures of the carping world.
Which since you come too late of our intent,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend. 
And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Go after, after, cousin Buckingham. 
The Mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post.
There, at your meet'st [advantage] of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edward's children.
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the Crown -- meaning indeed his house,
Which by the sign thereof was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust,
Which stretched unto their servants, daughters, wives,
Even where his raging eye or savage heart,
Without control, lusted to make a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them, when that my mother went with child
Of that insatiate Edward, noble York,
My princely father, then had wars in France,
And by true computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot;
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble Duke my father. 
Yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
Because, my lord, you know my mother lives. 
Doubt not, my lord, I'll play the orator 
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself -- and so, my lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle,
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.
I go, and towards three or four a' clock
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw;
Go thou to Friar [Penker]; bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.
Now will I go to take some privy order
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,
And to give order that no manner person
Have any time recourse unto the Princes.   
Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings,
Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed
That it may be today read o'er in Paul's.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I have spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing,
And yet within these five hours Hastings lived,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty.
Here's a good world the while! Who is so gross
That cannot see this palpable device?
Yet who['s] so bold but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world, and all will come to nought,
When such ill dealing must be seen in thought. 
How now, how now, what say the citizens?
Now, by the holy Mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum, say not a word.
Touched you the bastardy of Edward's children?
I did, with his contract with Lady Lucy,
And his contract by deputy in France,
Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire,
And his enforcement of the city wives,
His tyranny for trifles, his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
And his resemblance, being not like the Duke.
Withal I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose
Untouched or slightly handled in discourse.
And when [mine] oratory drew [to an] end,
I bid them that did love their country's good
Cry, "God save Richard, England's royal king!" 
No, so God help me, they spake not a word, 
But like dumb statues, or breathing stones, 
Stared each on other, and looked deadly pale;
Which when I saw, I reprehended them,
And asked the Mayor what meant this willful silence.
His answer was, the people were not used
To be spoke to but by the Recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again:
"Thus saith the Duke, thus hath the Duke inferred" --
But nothing [spake] in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps,
And some ten voices cried, "God save King Richard!"
And thus I took the vantage of those few:
"Thanks, gentle citizens and friends," quoth I,
"This general applause and cheerful shout
Argues your [wisdoms] and your love to Richard" --
And even here brake off, and came away.
What tongueless blocks were they! Would they not speak?
Will not the Mayor then and his brethren come?
The Mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear, 
Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit;
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
And stand between two churchmen, good my lord --
For on that ground I'll make a holy descant --
And be not easily won to our requests:
Play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it.
I go; and if you plead as well for them
As I can say nay to thee for myself,
No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Go, go up to the leads, the Lord Mayor knocks. 
Welcome my lord! I dance attendance here;
I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.
Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,
To visit him tomorrow or next day. 
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation, 
And in no worldly suits would he be moved, 
To draw him from his holy exercise.
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke,
Tell him, myself, the Mayor and Aldermen,
In deep designs, in matter of great moment,
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his Grace.
I'll signify so much unto him straight. 
Ah ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lulling on a lewd love-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtezans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul.
Happy were England, would this virtuous prince
Take on his Grace the sovereignty thereof,
But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
Marry, God defend his Grace should say us nay! 
I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.
Now, Catesby, what says his Grace?  [My lord,]
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to come to him,
His Grace not being warned thereof before:
He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me that I mean no good to him.
By heaven, we come to him in perfit love,
And so once more return and tell his Grace.
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.
See where his Grace stands, 'tween two clergymen!
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince, 
To stay him from the fall of vanity;
And see, a book of prayer in his hand -- 
True ornaments to know a holy man. 
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favorable ear to our requests,
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
My lord, there needs no such apology.
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me,
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Deferred the visitation of my friends.
But leaving this, what is your Grace's pleasure?
Even that (I hope) which pleaseth God above
And all good men of this ungoverned isle.
I do suspect I have done some offense
That seems disgracious in the city's eye,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
You have, my lord. Would it might please your Grace,
On our entreaties, to amend your fault!
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Know then, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical, 
The sceptred office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune, and your due of birth, 
The lineal glory of your royal house, 
To the corruption of a blemished stock;
Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our country's good,
The noble isle doth want [her] proper limbs;
[Her] face defaced with scars of infamy,
[Her] royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost should'red in the swallowing gulf
Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion.
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land:
Not as protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for another's gain;
But as successively, from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just cause come I to move your Grace.
I cannot tell if to depart in silence, 
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof,
Best fitteth my degree or your condition. 
If not to answer, you might haply think 
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me.
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So seasoned with your faithful love to me,
Then on the other side, I checked my friends.
Therefore -- to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last --
Definitively thus I answer you:
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First, if all obstacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As the ripe revenue and due of birth,
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
That I would rather hide me from my greatness --
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea --
Than in my greatness covet to be hid
And in the vapor of my glory smothered. 
But God be thanked, there is no need of me,
And much I need to help you, were there need: 
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit, 
Which mellowed by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make (no doubt) us happy by his reign.
On him I lay that you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars,
Which God defend that I should wring from him!
My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace,
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say that Edward is your brother's son:
So say we too, but not by Edward's wife;
For first was he contract to Lady Lucy --
Your mother lives a witness to his vow --
And afterward by substitute betrothed
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put off, a poor petitioner,
A care-crazed mother to a many sons,
A beauty-waning and distressed widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days, 
Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of his degree 
To base declension and loathed bigamy. 
By her, in his unlawful bed, he got
This Edward, whom our manners call the Prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This proffered benefit of dignity;
If not to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times
Unto a lineal true-derived course.
Do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
Alas, why would you heap this care on me?
I am unfit for state and majesty.
I do beseech you take it not amiss,
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.
If you refuse it -- as, in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the child, your brother's son; 
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse, 
Which we have noted in you to your kindred 
And egally indeed to all estates --
Yet know, whe'er you accept our suit or no,
Your brother's son shall never reign our king,
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house;
And in this resolution here we leave you.
Come, citizens. ['Zounds, I'll] entreat no more.
O, do not swear, my Lord of Buckingham.]
Call him again, sweet prince, accept their suit.
If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
Will you enforce me to a world of cares?
Call them again, I am not made of stones,
But penetrable to your kind entreaties,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham, and sage grave men,
Since you will buckle Fortune on my back, 
To bear her burthen whe'er I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the load; 
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach 
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
For God doth know, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire of this.
God bless your Grace! we see it and will say it.
In saying so you shall but say the truth.
Then I salute you with this royal title --
Long live Richard, England's worthy king!
tomorrow may it please you to be crowned?
Even when you please, for you will have it so.
tomorrow then we will attend your Grace,
And so most joyfully we take our leave. 
Come, let us to our holy work again. -- 
Farewell, my [cousin], farewell, gentle friends. 
Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet,
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, she's wand'ring to the Tower,
On pure heart's love, to greet the tender Prince.
Daughter, well met.  God give your Graces both
A happy and a joyful time of day!
As much to you, good sister! Whither away?
No farther than the Tower, and as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle Princes there.
Kind sister, thanks, we'll enter all together. 
And in good time, here the Lieutenant comes. 
Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the Prince and my young son of York?
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them,
The King hath strictly charged the contrary.
The King? who's that?  I mean the Lord Protector.
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds between their love and me?
I am their mother, who shall bar me from them?
I am their father's mother, I will see them.
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother;
Then bring me to their sights. I'll bear thy blame,
And take thy office from thee on my peril.
No, madam, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
Let me but meet you, ladies, [an] hour hence,
And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother 
And reverend looker on of two fair queens. 
Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news!
Despiteful tidings, O unpleasing news!
Be of good cheer. Mother, how fares your Grace?
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee gone!
Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels;
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.
Go hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead,
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam; 
Take all the swift advantage of the hours.
You shall have letters from me to my son 
In your behalf, to meet you on the way. 
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
A cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world,
Whose unavoided eye is murtherous.
Come, madam, come, I in all haste was sent.
And I with all unwillingness will go.
O would to God that the inclusive verge
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brains!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die ere men can say, "God save the Queen!"
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory,
To feed my humor wish thyself no harm.
No! why? When he that is my husband now 
Came to me as I followed Henry's corse,
When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands
Which issued from my other angel husband,
And that dear saint which then I weeping followed --
O, when, I say, I looked on Richard's face, 
This was my wish: "Be thou," quoth I, "accursed
For making me, so young, so old a widow! 
And when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed; 
And be thy wife -- if any be so mad --
More miserable by the life of thee
Than thou hast made me by my dear lord's death!"
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Within so small a time, my woman's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words,
And proved the subject of mine own soul's curse,
Which hitherto hath held [my] eyes from rest;
For never yet one hour in his bed
Did I enjoy the golden dew of sleep,
But with his timorous dreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
Poor heart, adieu, I pity thy complaining.
No more than with my soul I mourn for yours.
Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory!
Adieu, poor soul, that tak'st thy leave of it!
Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee! 
Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee! 
Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee!
I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me!
Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hour's joy wracked with a week of teen.
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls --
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes -- use my babies well!
So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell. 
Stand all apart. Cousin of Buckingham --
Give me thy hand.  Thus high, by thy advice 
And thy assistance, is King Richard seated;
But shall we wear these glories for a day?
Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
Still live they, and for ever let them last!
Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed.
Young Edward lives: think now what I would speak.
Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king.
Why, so you are, my thrice-renowned lord.
Ha? am I king? 'Tis so -- but Edward lives.
True, noble prince.  O bitter consequence,
That Edward still should live true noble prince!
Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead,
And I would have it suddenly performed.
What say'st thou now? Speak suddenly, be brief. 
Tut, tut, thou art all ice, thy kindness freezes. 
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,
Before I positively speak in this.
I will resolve you herein presently. 
The King is angry, see, he gnaws his lip.
I will converse with iron-witted fools
And unrespective boys; none are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes.
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?
I know a discontented gentleman
Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing. 
What is his name?  His name, my lord, is Tyrrel. 
The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels.
Hath he so long held out with me untired,
And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
The Marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled
To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad
That Anne, my wife, is very grievous sick;
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter;
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
That Anne, my queen, is sick and like to die. 
About it, for it stands me much upon
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me. 
I must be married to my brother's daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murther her brothers and then marry her --
Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Art thou indeed?  Prove me, my gracious lord.
Dar'st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
But I had rather kill two enemies.
Why, [there] thou hast it; two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower. 
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them. 
Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear. 
There is no more but so; say it is done,
And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
My lord, I have considered in my mind
The late request that you did sound me in.
Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
For which your honor and your faith is pawned,
Th' earldom of [Herford], and the moveables,
Which you have promised I shall possess.
Stanley, look to your wife. If she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
What says your Highness to my just request?
I do remember me, Henry the Sixt
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy. 
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
My lord, your promise for the earldom --
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The mayor in courtesy showed me the castle,
And called it Rouge-mount, at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mind
Upon the stroke of ten. Well, let it strike.
Because that like a Jack thou keep'st the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein today.
May it please you to resolve me in my suit.
Thou troublest me, I am not in the vein. 
And is it thus? repays he my deep service
With such contempt? Made I him king for this?
O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecknock while my fearful head is on!   
The tyrannous and bloody act is done,
The most arch deed of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, who I did suborn
To do this piece of [ruthless] butchery,
Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs,
Melted with tenderness and [kind] compassion,
Wept like [two] children in their deaths' sad story.
"O, thus," quoth Dighton, "lay the gentle babes."
"Thus, thus," quoth Forrest , "girdling one another
Within their alablaster innocent arms. 
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
[Which] in their summer beauty kissed each other. 
A book of prayers on their pillow lay, 
Which [once]," quoth Forrest, "almost changed any mind;
But O! the devil" -- there the villain stopped;
When Dighton thus told on, "We smothered
The most replenished sweet work of Nature
That from the prime creation e'er she framed."
Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse
They could not speak; and so I left them both,
To bear this tidings to the bloody King.
And here he comes. All health, my sovereign lord!
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done.  But didst thou see them dead?
I did, my lord.  And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them, 
But where (to say the truth) I do not know.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon, [at] after-supper, 
When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Mean time, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till then.  I humbly take my leave.   
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,
His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid this world good night.
Now for I know the Britain Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,
To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
Good or bad news, that thou com'st in so bluntly?
Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond, 
And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth. 
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.
Come, I have learned that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay [leads] impotent and snail-paced beggary.
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
Go muster men. My counsel is my shield;
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
So now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slily have I lurked,
To watch the waning of mine enemies.
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence 
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret; who comes here? 
Ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender babes!
My [unblown] flow'rs, new-appearing sweets!
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your aery wings
And hear your mother's lamentation!
Hover about her; say that right for right
Hath dimmed your infant morn to aged night.
So many miseries have crazed my voice
That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet,
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs,
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done? 
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son. 
Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal-living ghost,
Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurped,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood!
Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
If ancient sorrow be most reverent,
Give mine the benefit of seniory,
And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
[Tell over your woes again by viewing mine:] 
I had an Edward, till a Richard killed him;
I had a [Harry], till a Richard killed him: 
Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard killed him; 
Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him.
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou [holp'st] to kill him.
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
That excellent grand tyrant of the earth
That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mother's body,
And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge, 
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward; 
[Thy] other Edward dead, to quit my Edward; 
Young York he is but boot, because both they
Matched not the high perfection of my loss.
Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward,
And the beholders of this frantic play,
Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smoth'red in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor to buy souls
And send them thither; but at hand, at hand,
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.
To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I pray,
That I may live and say, "The dog is dead."
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
I called thee then vain flourish of my fortune; 
I called thee then poor shadow, painted queen,
The presentation of but what I was; 
The flattering index of a direful pageant; 
One heaved a-high, to be hurled down below;
A mother only mocked with two fair babes;
A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag
To be the aim of every dangerous shot;
A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble;
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?
Where be thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?
Who sues, and kneels, and says, "God save the Queen"?
Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;
For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;
For she being feared of all, now fearing one;
For she commanding all, obeyed of none. 
Thus hath the course of justice whirled about,
And left thee but a very prey to time, 
Having no more but thought of what thou wast 
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burthened yoke,
From which even here I slip my [weary] head,
And leave the burthen of it all on thee.
Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance,
These English woes shall make me smile in France.
O thou well skilled in curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!
Forbear to sleep the [nights], and fast the [days];
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is.
Bett'ring thy loss makes the bad causer worse;
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
My words are dull, O, quicken them with thine!
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine. 
Why should calamity be full of words?
Windy attorneys to their clients woes,
Aery succeeders of [intestate] joys, 
Poor breathing orators of miseries,
Let them have scope! though what they will impart 
Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart. 
If so then, be not tongue-tied; go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
My damned son that thy two sweet sons smothered.
The trumpet sounds, be copious in exclaims.
Who intercepts me in my expedition?
O, she that might have intercepted thee,
By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!
Hid'st thou that forehead with a golden crown
Where should be branded, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown,
And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son? 
Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey? 
A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
Rail on the Lord's anointed. Strike, I say!
Either be patient and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
Then patiently hear my impatience.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
That cannot brook the accent of reproof.
O, let me speak!  Do then, but I'll not hear.
I will be mild and gentle in my words.
And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.
Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,
God knows, in torment and in agony.
And came I not at last to comfort you? 
No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well,
Thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell. 
A grievous burthen was thy birth to me, 
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school-days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious,
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;
Thy age confirmed proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,
More mild but yet more harmful -- kind in hatred.
What comfortable hour canst thou name
That ever graced me with thy company?
Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that called your Grace
To breakfast once, forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your eye,
Let me march on and not offend you, madam.
Strike up the drum. I prithee hear me speak.
You speak too bitterly.  Hear me a word;
For I shall never speak to thee again.
Either thou wilt die by God's just ordinance
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, 
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And never more behold thy face again. 
Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse, 
Which in the day of battle tire thee more
Than all the complete armor that thou wear'st!
My prayers on the adverse party fight,
And there the little souls of Edward's children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end;
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend. 
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me; I say amen to her.
Stay, madam, I must talk a word with you.
I have no moe sons of the royal blood
For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
You have a daughter called Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
And must she die for this? O, let her live! 
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed, 
Throw over her the veil of infamy. 
So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.
Wrong not her birth, she is a royal princess.
To save her life, I'll say she is not so.
Her life is safest only in her birth.
And only in that safety died her brothers.
Lo at their birth good stars were opposite.
No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
True -- when avoided grace makes destiny:
My babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had blest thee with a fairer life.
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins!
Cousins indeed, and by their uncle cozened
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever lanched their tender hearts, 
Thy head (all indirectly) gave direction.
No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt 
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart 
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes;
And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,
Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours
Than ever you [or] yours by me were harmed!
What good is covered with the face of heaven,
To be discovered, that can do me good?
Th' advancement of your children, gentle lady.
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
Unto the dignity and height of fortune,
The high imperial type of this earth's glory. 
Flatter my sorrow with report of it;
Tell me, what state, what dignity, what honor, 
Canst thou demise to any child of mine? 
Even all I have -- ay, and myself and all --
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.
My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul;
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean that with my soul I love thy daughter,
And do intend to make her Queen of England. 
Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king? 
Even he that makes her queen. Who [should be else]?
What, thou?  Even so. How think you of it?
How canst thou woo her?  That [would I] learn of you,
As one being best acquainted with her humor.
Send to her by the man that slew her brothers
A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave
"Edward" and "York"; then haply will she weep.
Therefore present to her -- as [sometimes] Margaret
Did to thy father, steeped in Rutland's blood --
A [handkercher], which, say to her, did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
If this inducement move her not to love,
Send her a letter of thy noble deeds:
Tell her thou mad'st away her uncle Clarence, 
Her uncle Rivers, ay (and for her sake!),
Mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne. 
You mock me, madam, this [is] not the way
To win your daughter.  There is no other way,
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape
And not be Richard that hath done all this.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
Nay then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
Look what is done cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after-hours gives leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends I'll give it to your daughter;
If I have killed the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.
A grandam's name is little less in love
Than is the doting title of a mother; 
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your metal, of your very blood; 
Of all one pain, save for a night of groans 
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity.
The King, that calls your beauteous daughter wife,
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
Again shall you be mother to a king;
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repaired with double riches of content.
What? we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,
Advantaging their love with interest 
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go then, my mother, to thy daughter go, 
Make bold her bashful years with your experience; 
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale;
Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys;
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar's Caesar.
What were I best to say? Her father's brother
Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle? 
Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee, 
That God, the law, my honor, and her love 
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
Tell her the King, that may command, entreats.
That at her hands which the King's King forbids.
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
To vail the title, as her mother doth.
Say I will love her everlastingly.
But how long shall that title "ever" last?
Sweetly in force unto her fair live's end.
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty. 
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told. 
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead --
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
Harp not on that string, madam, that is past.
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown --
Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
I swear -- By nothing, for this is no oath:
Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor;
Thy Garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue;
Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory.
If something thou wouldst swear to be believed, 
Swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.
Then by myself -- Thyself is self-misused. 
Now by the world -- 'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
My father's death -- Thy life hath it dishonored.
Why then, by [God] -- [God's] wrong is most of all:
If thou didst fear to break an oath with him,
The unity the King my husband made
Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.
If thou hadst feared to break an oath by him,
Th' imperial metal, circling now thy head,
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the Princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,
Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?  The time to come.
That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash 
Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee.
The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered, 
Ungoverned youth, to wail it [in] their age; 
The parents live whose children thou hast butchered,
Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by times ill-used [o'erpast].
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous affairs
Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound!
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
Day, yield me not thy light, nor, night, thy rest!
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceeding, if with dear heart's love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter!
In her consists my happiness and thine;
Without her, follows to myself and thee,
Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin, and decay.
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, dear mother -- I must call you so -- 
Be the attorney of my love to her.
Plead what I will be, not what I have been; 
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve. 
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish[-fond] in great designs.
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
Ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.
But in your daughter's womb I bury them;
Where in that nest of spicery they will breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
And be a happy mother by the deed,
And you shall understand from me her mind.
Bear her my true love's kiss; and so farewell.      
Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast 
Rideth a puissant navy; to our shores
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmed, and unresolved to beat them back.
'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk;
Ratcliffe, thyself -- or Catesby -- where is he?
Here, my good lord.  Catesby, fly to the Duke.
I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.
[Ratcliffe], come hither. Post to Salisbury;
When thou com'st thither --  Dull unmindful villain,
Why stay'st thou here, and go'st not to the Duke?
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,
What from your Grace I shall deliver to him. 
O, true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straight 
The greatest strength and power that he can make, 
And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
Your Highness told me I should post before.
My mind is changed.   Stanley, what news with you?
None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing,
Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
Hoy-day, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
What need'st thou run so many miles about,
When thou mayest tell thy tale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?  Richmond is on the seas.
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-livered runagate, what doth he there? 
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess. 
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England, here to claim the crown.
Is the chair empty? is the sword unswayed?
Is the King dead? the empire unpossessed?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is England's king but great York's heir?
Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
No, my good lord, therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy power then, to beat him back?
Where be thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore,
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships? 
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north. 
Cold friends to me! What do they in the north,
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
They have not been commanded, mighty King.
Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
I'll muster up my friends and meet your Grace
Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
Ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond;
But I'll not trust thee.  Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.
I never was nor never will be false.
Go then, and muster men; but leave behind
Your son, George Stanley. Look your heart be firm,
Or else his head's assurance is but frail.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire, 
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,
Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,
With many moe confederates, are in arms.
In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,
And every hour more competitors
Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
My lord, the army of great Buckingham --
Out on [you], owls! nothing but songs of death? 
There, take thou that, till thou bring better news.
The news I have to tell your Majesty
Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters
Buckingham's army is dispersed and scattered, 
And he himself wand'red away alone,
No man knows whither.  I cry thee mercy; 
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Hath any well-advised friend proclaimed
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquess Dorset,
'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
But this good comfort bring I to your Highness:
The Britain navy is dispersed by tempest.
Richmond in Dorsetshire sent out a boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea or no;
Who answered him, they came from Buckingham
Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,
Hoised sail, and made his course again for Britain.
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,
If not to fight with foreign enemies, 
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken --
That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford 
Is colder [tidings], yet they must be told.
Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here, 
A royal battle might be won and lost.
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury, the rest march on with me.
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of the most deadly boar
My son George Stanley is franked up in hold;
If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
The fear of that holds off my present aid.
So get thee gone; commend me to thy lord.
He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
At Pembroke or at [Herford-]West in Wales. 
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier, 
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley, 
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew,
And many other of great name and worth;
And towards London do they bend their power,
If by the way they be not fought withal.
Well, hie thee to thy lord; I kiss his hand.
My letter will resolve him of my mind.
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
No, my good lord, therefore be patient.
Hastings, and Edward's children, Grey and Rivers,
Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand corrupted foul injustice, 
If that your moody discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour, 
Even for revenge mock my destruction! 
This is All-Souls' day, fellow, is it not?
Why then All-Souls' day is my body's doomsday.
This is the day which, in King Edward's time,
I wished might fall on me when I was found
False to his children and his wive's allies;
This is the day wherein I wished to fall
By the false faith of him whom most I trusted;
This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul,
Is the determined respite of my wrongs.
That high All-Seer, which I dallied with,
Hath turned my feigned prayer on my head,
And given in earnest what I begged in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms;
Thus Margaret's curse falls heavy on my neck:
"When he," quoth she, "shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a prophetess." 
Come lead me, officers, to the block of shame;
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame. 
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we marched on without impediment;
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash and makes his trough
In your embowelled bosoms -- this foul swine
Is now even in the centry of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn.
From Tamworth thither is but one day's march. 
In God's name cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace 
By this one bloody trial of sharp war. 
Every man's conscience is a thousand men,
To fight against this guilty homicide.
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
He hath no friends but what are friends for fear,
Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
All for our vantage. Then in God's name march!
True hope is swift and flies with swallow's wings,
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field.
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad? 
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk -- Here, most gracious liege. 
Norfolk, we must have knocks.    Ha, must we not?
We must both give and take, my loving lord.
Up with my tent! Here will I lie tonight --
But where tomorrow? Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
Why, our battalia trebles that account;
Besides, the King's name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse faction want.
Up with the tent! Come, noble gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the ground.
Call for some men of sound direction:
Let's lack no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.     
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright tract of his fiery car 
Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow. 
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paper in my tent;
I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small power.
My Lord of Oxford -- you, Sir William Brandon --
And [you], Sir Walter Herbert -- stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment;
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him,
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.
Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me --
Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
Unless I have mista'en his colors much
(Which well I am assured I have not done),
His regiment lies half a mile at least
South from the mighty power of the King.
If without peril it be possible,
Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him, 
And give him from me this most needful note.
Upon my life, my lord, I'll undertake it, 
And so God give you quiet rest tonight! 
Let us consult upon tomorrow's business.
In to my tent, the dew is raw and cold.
What is't a'clock?   It's supper-time, my lord,
It's nine a'clock.  I will not sup tonight.
What? is my beaver easier than it was?
And all my armor laid into my tent?
It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
Use careful watch, choose trusty [sentinels].
Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you, my lord.  Catesby!  My lord?
To Stanley's regiment, bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.  
Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
Saddle white Surrey for the field tomorrow.
Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.
I have not that alacrity of spirit
Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
It is, my lord.  Bid my guard watch; leave me. 
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,
Who prays continually for Richmond's good.
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief -- for so the season bids us be --
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
I, as I may -- that which I would I cannot --
With best advantage will deceive the time, 
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms;
But on thy side I may not be too forward, 
Lest being seen, thy brother, tender George, 
Be executed in his father's sight.
Farewell! the leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse
Which so long sund'red friends should dwell upon.
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu! Be valiant, and speed well!
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment.
I'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,
Lest leaden slumber peize me down tomorrow,
When I should mount with wings of victory.
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou whose captain I account myself,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries;
Make us thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise thee in the victory! 
To thee I do commend my watchful soul
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes:
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!   
Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow! 
Think how thou stab'st me in my prime of youth 
At Tewksbury. Despair therefore and die!
(To Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wronged souls
Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf.
King Henry's issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
When I was mortal, my anointed body
By thee was punched full of deadly holes.
Think on the Tower and me. Despair and die!
Harry the Sixt bids thee despair and die.
Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror!
Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,
Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish!
Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, 
I that was washed to death with fulsome wine,
Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death! 
tomorrow in the battle think on me, 
And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!
Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee.
Good angels guard thy battle! Live and flourish!
Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,
Rivers, that died at Pomfret! Despair and die!
Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fear
Awake and think our wrongs in Richard's bosom
[Will] conquer him! Awake and win the day!
Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower.
Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard, 
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death! 
Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die!
Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy.
Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy!
Live and beget a happy race of kings!
Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
And in a bloody battle end thy days!
Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die!
Quiet untroubled soul, awake, awake!
Arm, fight, and conquer for fair England's sake!
Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
Now fills thy sleep with perturbations. 
tomorrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die! 
Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep,
Dream of success and happy victory!
Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee.
The first was I that helped thee to the crown;
The last was I that felt thy tyranny.
O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
And die in terror of thy guiltiness!
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death;
Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath!
I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid,
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed.
God and good angels fight on Richmond's side,
And Richard falls in height of all his pride!
Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!
Have mercy, Jesu! Soft, I did but dream. 
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me! 
The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear? Myself? There's none else by.
Richard loves Richard, that is, I [am] I.
Is there a murtherer here? No. Yes, I am.
Then fly. What, from myself? Great reason why --
Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?
Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good
That I myself have done unto myself?
O no! Alas, I rather hate myself
For hateful deeds committed by myself.
I am a villain; yet I lie, I am not.
Fool, of thyself speak well; fool, do not flatter:
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree;
Murther, stern murther, in the direst degree;
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all, "Guilty! guilty!" 
I shall despair; there is no creature loves me,
And if I die no soul will pity me. 
And wherefore should they, since that I myself 
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of all that I had murthered
Came to my tent, and every one did threat
tomorrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.
Hath twice done salutation to the morn,
Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
O Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream!
What think'st thou -- will our friends prove all true?
No doubt, my lord.  O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear!
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight
Have strook more terror to the soul of Richard 
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond. 
'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me, 
Under our tents I'll play the ease-dropper,
To see if any mean to shrink from me.    
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams
That ever ent'red in a drowsy head
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murthered
Came to my tent and cried on victory.
I promise you, my soul is very jocund
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it, lords?
Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction. 
More than I have said, loving countrymen, 
The leisure and enforcement of the time 
Forbids to dwell upon, yet remember this:
God and our good cause fight upon our side;
The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,
Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces.
Richard except, those whom we fight against
Had rather have us win than him they follow:
For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,
A bloody tyrant and a homicide;
One raised in blood, and one in blood established;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughtered those that were the means to help him;
A base foul stone, made precious by the foil
Of England's chair, where he is falsely set;
One that hath ever been God's enemy.
Then if you fight against God's enemy,
God will in justice ward you as his soldiers;
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
If you do fight against your country's foes,
Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire; 
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors; 
If you do free your children from the sword, 
Your children's children quits it in your age.
Then in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully.
God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
That he was never trained up in arms.
He said the truth, and what said Surrey then?
He smiled and said, "The better for our purpose." 
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar. 
Who saw the sun today?  Not I, my lord.
Then he disdains to shine, for by the book
He should have braved the east an hour ago.
A black day will it be to somebody.
My lord?  The sun will not be seen today,
The sky doth frown and low'r upon our army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine today? Why, what is that to me
More than to Richmond? for the self-same heaven
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
Arm, arm, my lord, the foe vaunts in the field.
Come, bustle, bustle! Caparison my horse!
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power.
I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain, 
And thus my battle shall be ordered:
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length, 
Consisting equally of horse and foot; 
Our archers shall be placed in the midst;
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George to [boot]! What think'st thou, Norfolk?
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
For Dickon thy master is bought and sold."
A thing devised by the enemy.
Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.
Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls;
Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
Devised at first to keep the strong in awe:
Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law!
March on, join bravely, let us to it pell-mell; 
If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
What shall I say more than I have inferred?
Remember whom you are to cope withal:
A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways, 
A scum of Britains and base lackey peasants,
Whom their o'ercloyed country vomits forth 
To desperate adventures and assured destruction. 
You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;
You having lands, and blest with beauteous wives,
They would restrain the one, distain the other.
And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,
Long kept in Britain at our mother's cost?
A milksop, one that never in his life
Felt so much cold as over shoes in snow?
Let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again;
Lash hence these overweening rags of France,
Who (but for dreaming on this fond exploit)
For want of means, poor rats, had hanged themselves.
If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
And not these bastard Britains, whom our fathers
Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped,
And in record left them the heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy our lands? lie with our wives?
Ravish our daughters?  Hark, I hear their drum.
Fight, gentlemen of England! fight, bold yeomen! 
Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head!
Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood; 
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves! 
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh,
After the battle let George Stanley die.
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.
Advance our standards, set upon our foes.
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.    
Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The King enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger. 
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death. 
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost! 
A horse, a horse! my kingdom for a horse!
Withdraw, my lord, I'll help you to a horse.
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die.
I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
Five have I slain today in stead of him.
A horse, a horse! my kingdom for a horse! 
God and your arms be praised, victorious friends,
The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Lo here this long-usurped royalty 
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch 
Have I plucked off to grace thy brows withal.
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
Great God of heaven, say amen to all!
But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
What men of name are slain on either side?
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord [Ferrers],
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Inter their bodies as become their births.
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
That in submission will return to us,
And then as we have ta'en the sacrament,
We will unite the White Rose and the Red.
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frowned upon their enmity!
What traitor hears me, and says not amen?
England hath long been mad and scarred herself:
The brother blindly shed the brother's blood, 
The father rashly slaughtered his own son,
The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire. 
All this divided York and Lancaster, 
Divided in their dire division,
O now let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
And let their heirs (God, if thy will be so)
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
With smiling plenty, and fair prosperous days!
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in streams of blood!
Let them not live to taste this land's increase
That would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again;
That she may long live here, God say amen!
<TGVVS> Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus: 
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
Were't not affection chains thy tender days
To the sweet glances of thy honored love,
I rather would entreat thy company,
To see the wonders of the world abroad,
Than (living dully sluggardized at home)
Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.
But since thou lov'st, love still, and thrive therein,
Even as I would, when I to love begin.
Wilt thou be gone?  Sweet Valentine, adieu,
Think on thy Proteus, when thou, happ'ly, seest
Some rare noteworthy object in thy travel.
Wish me partaker in thy happiness
When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger
(If ever danger do environ thee)
Commend thy grievance to my holy Prayers,
For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.
And on a love-book pray for my success?
Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.
That's on some shallow story of deep love, 
How young Leander crossed the Hellespont.
That's a deep story of a deeper love, 
For he was more than over shoes in love. 
'Tis true; for you are over boots in love,
And yet you never swom the Hellespont.
Over the boots? nay, give me not the boots.
No, I will not; for it boots thee not.
To be in love -- where scorn is bought with groans;
With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights:
If happ'ly won, perhaps a hapless gain;
If lost, why then a grievous labor won;
However -- but a folly bought with wit,
Or else a wit by folly vanquished.
So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
So, by your circumstance, I fear you'll prove.
'Tis love you cavil at, I am not Love.
Love is your master, for he masters you;
And he that is so yoked by a fool,
Methinks should not be chronicled for wise. 
Yet writers say: as in the sweetest bud
The eating canker dwells, so eating love 
Inhabits in the finest wits of all. 
And writers say: as the most forward bud
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
Even so by love the young and tender wit
Is turned to folly, blasting in the bud,
Losing his verdure, even in the prime,
And all the fair effects of future hopes.
But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee
That art a votary to fond desire?
Once more adieu.  My father at the road
Expects my coming, there to see me shipped.
And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
Sweet Proteus, no; now let us take our leave.
To Milan let me hear from thee by letters
Of thy success in love, and what news else
Betideth here in absence of thy friend;
And I likewise will visit thee with mine.
All happiness bechance to thee in Milan.
As much to you at home; and so farewell.
He after honor hunts, I after love: 
He leaves his friends, to dignify them more;
I [leave] myself, my friends, and all, for love. 
Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphised me, 
Made me neglect my studies, lose my time,
War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.
Sir Proteus!  'save you!  Saw you my master?
But now he parted hence to embark for Milan.
Twenty to one then he is shipped already,
And I have played the sheep in losing him.
Indeed a sheep doth very often stray,
And if the shepherd be awhile away.
A silly answer, and fitting well a sheep.
Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance. 
It shall go hard but I'll prove it by another.
But dost thou hear? gav'st thou my letter to Julia?
Nay, in that you are astray; 'twere best pound you.
You mistake; I mean the pound -- a pinfold. 
From a pound to a pin? fold it over and over,
No, no, you shall have it for bearing the letter.
Well, sir, here is for your pains.  What said she?
Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
Why? couldst thou perceive so much from her?
Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wrack,
Which cannot perish having thee aboard,
Being destined to a drier death on shore.  
I must go send some better messenger:
I fear my Julia would not deign my lines, 
Receiving them from such a worthless post.
But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
Ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.
Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
That every day with parle encounter me,
In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
Please you repeat their names, I'll show my mind
According to my shallow simple skill.
What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
As of a knight well-spoken, neat, and fine;
But were I you, he never should be mine.
What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio?
Well of his wealth; but of himself, so, so.
What think'st thou of the gentle Proteus?
Lord, Lord! to see what folly reigns in us!
How now? what means this passion at his name?
Pardon, dear madam,'tis a passing shame 
That I (unworthy body as I am) 
Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
Then thus: of many good I think him best.
I have no other but a woman's reason:
I think him so, because I think him so.
And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
Ay -- if you thought your love not cast away.
Why, he, of all the rest, hath never moved me.
Yet he, of all the rest, I think best loves ye.
His little speaking shows his love but small.
Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
They do not love that do not show their love.
O, they love least that let men know their love.
Sir Valentine's page; and sent, I think, from Proteus. 
Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!
Dare you presume to harbor wanton lines?
To whisper and conspire against my youth?
Now trust me,'tis an office of great worth,
And you an officer fit for the place.
There! take the paper; see it be returned,
Or else return no more into my sight.
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
Will ye be gone?  That you may ruminate.  
And yet I would I had o'erlooked the letter; 
It were a shame to call her back again, 
And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.
What 'fool is she, that knows I am a maid,
And would not force the letter to my view!
Since maids, in modesty, say "no" to that
Which they would have the profferer construe "ay."
Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love,
That (like a testy babe) will scratch the nurse
And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod!
How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
When willingly I would have had her here!
How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
When inward joy enforced my heart to smile!
My penance is, to call Lucetta back
And ask remission for my folly past.
What ho! Lucetta! What would your ladyship?
Is't near dinner-time? I would it were,
That you might kill your stomach on your meat, 
And not upon your maid. What is't that you 
To take a paper up that I let fall.
Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
Madam, it will not lie where it concerns
Unless it have a false interpreter.
Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
That I might sing it, madam, to a tune:
Give me a note, your ladyship can set.
As little by such toys as may be possible:
Best sing it to the tune of "Light o' love."
It is too heavy for so light a tune.
Heavy? belike it hath some burden then?
Ay; and melodious were it, would you sing it.
And why not you? I cannot reach so high.
Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out. 
And yet methinks I do not like this tune. 
You do not? No, madam,'tis too sharp.
And mar the concord with too harsh a descant:
There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.
The mean is drowned with [your] unruly bass.
Indeed I bid the base for Proteus.
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
Go, get you gone; and let the papers lie:
You would be fing'ring them, to anger me.
She makes it strange, but she would be best pleased
To be so ang'red with another letter.
Nay, would I were so ang'red with the same.
O hateful hands, to tear such loving words!
Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey,
And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
I'll kiss each several paper for amends. 
Look, here is writ "kind Julia." Unkind Julia,
As in revenge of thy ingratitude, 
I throw thy name against the bruising stones, 
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
And here is writ "love-wounded Proteus."
Poor wounded name:  my bosom as a bed
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly healed;
And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.
But twice, or thrice, was "Proteus" written down:
Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
Till I have found each letter in the letter,
Except mine own name; that, some whirlwind bear
Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock,
And throw it thence into the raging sea.
Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ,
"Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus:
To the sweet Julia" -- that I'll tear away --
And yet I will not, sith so prettily
He couples it to his complaining names.
Thus will I fold them one upon another;
Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
If you respect them, best to take them up.
Nay, I was taken up for laying them down;
Yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.
I see you have a month's mind to them.
Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
I see things too, although you judge I wink.
Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was that
Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.
Why, what of him? He wond'red that your lordship
Would suffer him to spend his youth at home,
While other men, of slender reputation,
Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:
Some to the wars, to try their fortune there;
Some to discover islands far away; 
Some to the studious universities.
For any or for all these exercises 
He said that Proteus, your son, was meet; 
And did request me to importune you
To let him spend his time no more at home,
Which would be great impeachment to his age,
In having known no travel in his youth.
Nor need'st thou much importune me to that
Whereon this month I have been hammering.
I have considered well his loss of time,
And how he cannot be a perfect man,
Not being tried and tutored in the world:
Experience is by industry achieved,
And perfected by the swift course of time.
Then tell me, whither were I best to send him?
I think your lordship is not ignorant
How his companion, youthful Valentine,
Attends the Emperor in his royal court.
'Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither:
There shall he practice tilts and tournaments,
Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen, 
And be in eye of every exercise
Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth. 
I like thy counsel; well hast thou advised; 
And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it,
The execution of it shall make known:
Even with the speediest expedition
I will dispatch him to the Emperor's court.
tomorrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso.
With other gentlemen of good esteem
Are journeying to salute the Emperor,
And to commend their service to his will.
Good company; with them shall Proteus go --
And in good time! now will we break with him.
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
Here is her oath for love, her honor's pawn:
O that our fathers would applaud our loves,
To seal our happiness with their consents!
How now? what letter are you reading there?
May't please your lordship,'tis a word or two 
Of commendations sent from Valentine,
Delivered by a friend that came from him. 
Lend me the letter; let me see what news. 
There is no news, my lord, but that he writes
How happily he lives, how well-beloved
And daily graced by the Emperor;
Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
And how stand you affected to his wish?
As one relying on your lordship's will,
And not depending on his friendly wish.
My will is something sorted with his wish:
Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed;
For what I will, I will, and there an end.
I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time
With Valentinus in the Emperor's court;
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
Like exhibition thou shalt have from me.
tomorrow be in readiness to go --
Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.
My lord I cannot be so soon provided:
Please you deliberate a day or two.
Look what thou want'st shall be sent after thee. 
No more of stay:  tomorrow thou must go.
Come on, Panthino; you shall be employed 
Thus have I shunned the fire for fear of burning,
And drenched me in the sea, where I am drowned.
I feared to show my father Julia's letter,
Lest he should take exceptions to my love,
And with the vantage of mine own excuse
Hath he excepted most against my love.
O, how this spring of love resembleth
The uncertain glory of an April day,
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
And by and by a cloud takes all away.
Sir Proteus, your [father] calls for you:
He is in haste; therefore I pray you go.
Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto,
And yet a thousand times it answers"no."  
Sir, your glove.  Not mine: my gloves are on.
Why then this may be yours -- for this is but one. 
Ha? let me see; ay, give it me, it's mine:
Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine --
And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
Go to, sir; tell me, do you know Madam Silvia?
Why, how know you that I am in love?
But tell me: dost thou know my lady Silvia?
She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?
Hast thou observed that?  Even she I mean.
You never saw her since she was deformed.
If you love her, you cannot see her. Why?
In conclusion, I stand affected to her. 
I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
And have you? I have.  Are they not lamely writ?
No, boy, but as well as I can do them.
O, give ye good ev'n! here's a million of manners.
Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
He should give her interest, and she gives it him. 
As you enjoined me, I have writ your letter
Unto the secret, nameless friend of yours; 
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in, 
But for my duty to your ladyship.
Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off,
For being ignorant to whom it goes,
I writ at random, very doubtfully.
Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
No, madam; so it stead you, I will write
(Please you command) a thousand times as much;
A pretty period!  Well -- I guess the sequel;
And yet I will not name it -- and yet I care not --
And yet take this again -- and yet I thank you --
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
And yet you will; and yet another "yet."
What means your ladyship?  Do you not like it?
Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ, 
But (since unwillingly) take them again.
Nay, take them.  Madam, they are for you. 
Ay, ay; you writ them, sir, at my request,
But I will none of them; they are for you.
I would have had them writ more movingly.
Please you, I'll write your ladyship another.
And when it's writ, for my sake read it over,
And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
Why, if it please you, take it for your labor;
How now, sir?  What are you reasoning with yourself? 
Nay, I was rhyming; 'tis you that have the reason. 
To be a spokesman from Madam Silvia.
To yourself; why, she woos you by a figure.
What figure? By a letter, I should say.
She gave me none, except an angry word.
That's the letter I writ to her friend.
Ay, but hearken, sir; though the chameleon
When possibly I can, I will return.
If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
Keep this remembrance for thy Julia's sake.
Why then we'll make exchange: here, take you this.
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
Here is my hand for my true constancy;
And when that hour o'erslips me in the day 
Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake, 
The next ensuing hour some foul mischance
Torment me for my love's forgetfulness!
My father stays my coming; answer not;
The tide is now -- nay, not thy tide of tears,
That tide will stay me longer than I should.
Julia, farewell! What, gone without a word?
Ay, so true love should do: it cannot speak,
For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
Alas, this parting strikes poor lovers dumb.  
Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done
Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.
Come; come away, man -- I was sent to call thee.
Sir -- call me what thou dar'st. Wilt thou go? 
Mistress? Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.
Ay, boy, it's for love. Not of you.
Of my mistress then. 'Twere good you knocked him.
Servant, you are sad. Indeed, madam, I seem so.
Seem you that you are not? Happ'ly I do.
So do counterfeits. So do you.
What seem I that I am not? Wise.
What instance of the contrary? Your folly.
What, angry, Sir Thurio? do you change color?
Give him leave, madam, he is a kind of chameleon.
Ay, sir, and done too -- for this time.
'Tis indeed, madam, we thank the giver.
Yourself, sweet lady, for you gave the fire.
No more, gentlemen, no more; here comes my father.
Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard beset.
Sir Valentine, your father is in good health:
What say you to a letter from your friends
Of much good news? My lord, I will be thankful
To any happy messenger from thence.
Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?
Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman
To be of worth and worthy estimation,
And not without desert so well reputed.
Ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves
The honor and regard of such a father.
I knew him as myself: for from our infancy
We have conversed and spent our hours together,
And though myself have been an idle truant, 
Omitting the sweet benefit of time
To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection, 
Yet hath Sir Proteus (for that's his name) 
Made use and fair advantage of his days;
His years but young, but his experience old;
His head unmellowed, but his judgment ripe;
And in a word (for far behind his worth
Comes all the praises that I now bestow),
He is complete in feature and in mind
With all good grace to grace a gentleman.
Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good,
He is as worthy for an empress' love
As meet to be an emperor's counsellor.
Well, sir -- this gentleman is come to me
With commendation from great potentates,
And here he means to spend his time a while.
I think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.
Should I have wished a thing, it had been he.
Welcome him then according to his worth --
Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio;
For Valentine, I need not cite him to it.
I will send him hither to you presently.
This is the gentleman I told your ladyship 
Had come along with me, but that his mistress
Did hold his eyes locked in her crystal looks. 
Belike that now she hath enfranchised them 
Upon some other pawn for fealty.
Nay sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
Nay then he should be blind, and being blind,
How could he see his way to seek out you?
Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself:
Upon a homely object Love can wink.
Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.
Welcome, dear Proteus!  Mistress, I beseech you
Confirm his welcome with some special favor.
His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
If this be he you oft have wished to hear from.
Mistress, it is: sweet lady, entertain him
To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.
Too low a mistress for so high a servant. 
Not so, sweet lady, but too mean a servant
To have a look of such a worthy mistress. 
Leave off discourse of disability. 
Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
My duty will I boast of, nothing else.
And duty never yet did want his meed.
Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
I'll die on him that says so but yourself.
Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
I wait upon his pleasure.  Come, Sir Thurio,
Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome;
I'll leave you to confer of home affairs;
When you have done, we look to hear from you.
We'll both attend upon your ladyship.
Now tell me: how do all from whence you came?
Your friends are well and have them much commended. 
And how do yours? I left them all in health.
How does your lady, and how thrives your love?
My tales of love were wont to weary you;
I know you joy not in a love-discourse.
Ay, Proteus, but that life is altered now:
I have done penance for contemning Love,
Whose high imperious thoughts have punished me
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
With nightly tears, and daily heart-sore sighs,
For in revenge of my contempt of love,
Love hath chased sleep from my enthralled eyes,
And made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow.
O gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord,
And hath so humbled me as I confess
Nor to his service no such joy on earth:
Now no discourse, except it be of love;
Now can I break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep,
Upon the very naked name of love.
Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.
Was this the idol that you worship so? 
Even she; and is she not a heavenly saint?
No; but she is an earthly paragon. 
Call her divine.  I will not flatter her.
O, flatter me; for love delights in praises.
When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills,
And I must minister the like to you.
Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
Yet let her be a principality,
Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.
Except my mistress. Sweet, except not any,
Except thou wilt except against my love.
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
And I will help thee to prefer her too:
She shall be dignified with this high honor --
To bear my lady's train, lest the base earth
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss,
And of so great a favor growing proud,
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flow'r,
And make rough winter everlastingly.
Why, Valentine, what braggadism is this?
Pardon me, Proteus, all I can is nothing 
To her, whose worth [makes] other worthies nothing:
She is alone.  Then let her alone. 
Not for the world.  Why, man, she is mine own,
And I as rich in having such a jewel
As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,
The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold.
Forgive me, that I do not dream on thee,
Because thou seest me dote upon my love.
My foolish rival, that her father likes
(Only for his possessions are so huge),
Is gone with her alone, and I must after,
For love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.
With all the cunning manner of our flight,
Determined of -- how I must climb her window,
The ladder made of cords, and all the means
Plotted and 'greed on for my happiness.
Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel. 
Go on before; I shall inquire you forth.
I must unto the road, to disembark 
Some necessaries that I needs must use, 
Even as one heat another heat expels,
Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
So the remembrance of my former love
Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
[Is it] mine [eye], or Valentinus' praise,
Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
That makes me reasonless, to reason thus?
She is fair; and so is Julia that I love
(That I did love, for now my love is thaw'd,
Which like a waxen image 'gainst a fire
Bears no impression of the thing it was).
Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
And that I love him not as I was wont:
O, but I love his lady too too much,
And that's the reason I love him so little.
How shall I dote on her with more advice,
That thus without advice begin to love her? 
'Tis but her picture I have yet beheld,
And that hath dazzled my reason's light; 
There is no reason but I shall be blind.
If I can check my erring love, I will;
If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.
Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I
What an ass art thou!  I understand thee not.
But tell me true, will't be a match?
The conclusion is then, that it will.
I never knew him otherwise. Than how?
Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak'st me.
Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy master.
To leave my Julia -- shall I be forsworn?
To love fair Silvia -- shall I be forsworn?
To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn.
And ev'n that pow'r which gave me first my oath
Provokes me to this threefold perjury.
Love bade me swear, and Love bids me forswear.
O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned,
Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it!
At first I did adore a twinkling star,
But now I worship a celestial sun.
Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken,
And he wants wit that wants resolved will
To learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better.
Fie, fie, unreverend tongue, to call her bad,
Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferred
With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths.
I cannot leave to love, and yet I do;
But there I leave to love where I should love. 
Julia I lose, and Valentine I lose:
If I keep them, I needs must lose myself; 
If I lose them, thus find I by their loss -- 
For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Silvia.
I to myself am dearer than a friend,
For love is still most precious in itself,
And Silvia (witness heaven, that made her fair)
Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.
I will forget that Julia is alive,
Rememb'ring that my love to her is dead;
And Valentine I'll hold an enemy,
Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend.
I cannot now prove constant to myself,
Without some treachery used to Valentine.
This night he meaneth with a corded ladder
To climb celestial Silvia's chamber-window,
Myself in counsel his competitor.
Now presently I'll give her father notice
Of their disguising and pretended flight,
Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine;
For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter;
But, Valentine being gone, I'll quickly cross
By some sly trick blunt Thurio's dull proceeding. 
Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift.
Counsel, Lucetta; gentle girl, assist me;
And ev'n in kind love I do conjure thee,
Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
Are visibly charactered and engraved,
To lesson me and tell me some good mean
How with my honor I may undertake
A journey to my loving Proteus.
Alas, the way is wearisome and long.
A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary
To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps;
Much less shall she that hath Love's wings to fly,
And when the flight is made to one so dear,
Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.
Better forbear till Proteus make return.
O, know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food?
Pity the dearth that I have pined in,
By longing for that food so long a time.
Didst thou but know the inly touch of love, 
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
As seek to quench the fire of love with words. 
I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire, 
But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
The more thou dam'st it up, the more it burns:
The current that with gentle murmur glides,
But when his fair course is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with th' enamelled stones,
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
And so by many winding nooks he strays
With willing sport to the wild ocean.
Then let me go, and hinder not my course:
I'll be as patient as a gentle stream,
And make a pastime of each weary step,
Till the last step have brought me to my love,
And there I'll rest, as after much turmoil
A blessed soul doth in Elysium.
But in what habit will you go along?
Not like a woman, for I would prevent 
The loose encounters of lascivious men:
Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds 
As may beseem some well-reputed page. 
Why then your ladyship must cut your hair.
No, girl, I'll knit it up in silken strings,
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots:
To be fantastic may become a youth
Of greater time than I shall show to be.
What fashion, madam, shall I make your breeches?
That fits as well as "Tell me, good my lord,
What compass will you wear your farthingale?"
Why, ev'n what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.
You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
Out, out, Lucetta, that will be ill-favored.
A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin,
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
Lucetta, as thou lov'st me, let me have
What thou think'st meet, and is most mannerly.
But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
For undertaking so unstaid a journey? 
I fear me it will make me scandalized.
If you think so, then stay at home and go not. 
Then never dream on infamy, but go.
If Proteus like your journey when you come,
No matter who's displeased when you are gone:
I fear me he will scarce be pleased withal.
That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears,
And instances of infinite of love,
Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
All these are servants to deceitful men.
Base men, that use them to so base effect!
But truer stars did govern Proteus' birth:
His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
Pray heav'n he prove so when you come to him!
How, as thou lov'st me, do him not that wrong,
To bear a hard opinion of his truth: 
Only deserve my love by loving him,
And presently go with me to my chamber, 
To take a note of what I stand in need of, 
To furnish me upon my longing journey.
All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.
Come; answer not; but to it presently,
I am impatient of my tarriance.
Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, a while,
We have some secrets to confer about. 
Now tell me, Proteus, what's your will with me?
My gracious lord, that which I would discover
The law of friendship bids me to conceal,
But when I call to mind your gracious favors
Done to me (undeserving as I am),
My duty pricks me on to utter that
Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
This night intends to steal away your daughter;
Myself am one made privy to the plot. 
I know you have determined to bestow her
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates, 
And should she thus be stol'n away from you, 
It would be much vexation to your age.
Thus, for my duty's sake, I rather chose
To cross my friend in his intended drift,
Than, by concealing it, heap on your head
A pack of sorrows which would press you down,
Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care,
Which to requite, command me while I live.
This love of theirs myself have often seen,
Haply when they have judged me fast asleep,
And oftentimes have purposed to forbid
Sir Valentine her company and my court;
But fearing lest my jealous aim might err,
And so, unworthily, disgrace the man
(A rashness that I ever yet have shunned),
I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
That which thyself hast now disclosed to me.
And that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested,
I nightly lodge her in an upper tow'r, 
The key whereof myself have ever kept;
And thence she cannot be conveyed away. 
Know, noble lord, they have devised a mean 
How he her chamber-window will ascend,
And with a corded ladder fetch her down;
For which the youthful lover now is gone,
And this way comes he with it presently,
Where (if it please you) you may intercept him.
But, good my lord, do it so cunningly
That my discovery be not aimed at:
For love of you, not hate unto my friend,
Hath made me publisher of this pretense.
Upon mine honor, he shall never know
That I had any light from thee of this.
Adieu, my lord, Sir Valentine is coming. 
Sir Valentine, whither away so fast? 
Please it your Grace, there is a messenger
That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
And I am going to deliver them.
The tenure of them doth but signify
My health and happy being at your court.
Nay then no matter; stay with me a while;
I am to break with thee of some affairs
That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.
'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought
To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.
I know it well, my lord, and sure the match
Were rich and honorable; besides, the gentleman
Is full of virtue, bounty, worth, and qualities
Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter.
Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him?
No, trust me, she is peevish, sullen, froward,
Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty,
Neither regarding that she is my child,
Nor fearing me as if I were her father,; 
And may I say to thee, this pride of hers
(Upon advice) hath drawn my love from her, 
And where I thought the remnant of mine age 
Should have been cherished by her child-like duty,
I now am full resolved to take a wife,
And turn her out to who will take her in:
Then let her beauty be her wedding-dow'r,
For me and my possessions she esteems not.
What would your Grace have me to do in this?
There is a lady in [Milano] here
Whom I affect; but she is nice and coy,
And nought esteems my aged eloquence.
Now therefore would I have thee to my tutor
(For long agone I have forgot to court;
Besides, the fashion of the time is changed)
How and which way I may bestow myself
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
Win her with gifts, if she respect not words:
Dumb jewels often in their silent kind
More than quick words do move a woman's mind.
But she did scorn a present that I sent her.
A woman sometime scorns what best contents her.
Send her another; never give her o'er, 
For scorn at first makes after-love the more. 
If she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you,
But rather to beget more love in you.
If she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone,
For why, the fools are mad, if left alone.
Take no repulse, what ever she doth say;
Forget you gone, "she doth not mean away!"
Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces;
Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces.
That man that hath a tongue, I say is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
But she I mean is promised by her friends
Unto a youthful gentleman of worth,
And kept severely from resort of men,
That no man hath access by day to her.
Why then I would resort to her by night.
Ay, but the doors be locked, and keys kept safe,
That no man hath recourse to her by night.
What lets but one may enter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground, 
And built so shelving that one cannot climb it
Without apparent hazard of his life. 
Why then a ladder, quaintly made of cords, 
To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks,
Would serve to scale another Hero's tow'r,
So bold Leander would adventure it.
Now as thou art a gentleman of blood,
Advise me where I may have such a ladder.
When would you use it? pray, sir, tell me that.
This very night; for Love is like a child,
That longs for every thing that he can come by.
By seven a' clock I'll get you such a ladder.
But hark thee: I will go to her alone.
How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
Under a cloak that is of any length.
A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
Ay, my good lord. Then let me see thy cloak --
I'll get me one of such another length.
Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
I pray thee let me feel thy cloak upon me. 
What letter is this same? What's here? "To Silvia"?
And here an engine fit for my proceeding! 
I'll be so bold to break the seal for once.
"My thoughts do harbor with my Silvia nightly,
And slaves they are to me that send them flying:
O, could their master come and go as lightly,
Himself would lodge where, senseless, they are lying!
My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them,
While I, their king, that thither them importune,
Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them,
Because myself do want my servants' fortune.
I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
That they should harbor where their lord should be."
"Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee."
'Tis so; and here's the ladder for the purpose.
Why, Phaeton (for thou art Merops' son),
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car,
And with thy daring folly burn the world?
Wilt thou reach stars, because they shine on thee?
Go, base intruder, overweening slave,
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates, 
And think my patience (more than thy desert)
Is privilege for thy departure hence. 
Thank me for this more than for all the favors 
Which (all too much) I have bestowed on thee.
But if thou linger in my territories
Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
By heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love
I ever bore my daughter, or thyself.
Be gone, I will not hear thy vain excuse,
But as thou lov'st thy life, make speed from hence.
And why not death, rather than living torment?
To die is to be banished from myself,
And Silvia is myself: banished from her
Is self from self, a deadly banishment.
What light is light, if Silvia be not seen?
What joy is joy, if Silvia be not by?
Unless it be to think that she is by,
And feed upon the shadow of perfection.
Except I be by Silvia in the night,
There is no music in the nightingale;
Unless I look on Silvia in the day, 
There is no day for me to look upon.
She is my essence, and I leave to be, 
If I be not by her fair influence 
Fostered, illumined, cherished, kept alive.
I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom:
Tarry I here, I but attend on death,
But fly I hence, I fly away from life.
Run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.
Who then? his spirit? Neither. What then? Nothing.
Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
Who wouldst thou strike? Nothing. Villain, forbear. 
Why, sir, I'll strike nothing.  I pray you -- 
My ears are stopped and cannot hear good news,
So much of bad already hath possessed them.
Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
For they are harsh, untuneable, and bad.
Is Silvia dead? No, Valentine.
No Valentine indeed, for sacred Silvia.
Hath she forsworn me? No, Valentine.
No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.
Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
That thou art banished -- O, that's the news! --
From hence, from Silvia, and from me thy friend.
O, I have fed upon this woe already,
And now excess of it will make me surfeit.
Doth Silvia know that I am banished? 
Ay, ay; and she hath offered to the doom
(Which unreversed stands in effectual force) 
A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears; 
Those at her father's churlish feet she tendered,
With them, upon her knees, her humble self,
Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them
As if but now they waxed pale for woe:
But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears
Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire;
But Valentine, if he be ta'en, must die.
Besides, her intercession chafed him so,
When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
That to close prison he commanded her,
With many bitter threats of biding there.
No more; unless the next word that thou speak'st
Have some malignant power upon my life;
If so -- I pray thee breathe it in mine ear,
As ending anthem of my endless dolor.
Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
And study help for that which thou lament'st.
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good. 
Here if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love;
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life. 
Hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that 
And manage it against despairing thoughts.
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence,
Which, being writ to me, shall be delivered
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
The time now serves not to expostulate:
Come, I'll convey thee through the city-gate;
And ere I part with thee, confer at large
Of all that may concern thy love-affairs.
As thou lov'st Silvia (though not for thyself)
Regard thy danger, and along with me.
I pray thee, Launce, and if thou seest my boy,
Bid him make haste and meet me at the North-gate.
Go, sirrah, find him out.  Come, Valentine.
O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
Fie on thee, jolthead, thou canst not read.
I will try thee.  Tell me this: who begot thee?
Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you 
Now Valentine is banished from her sight. 
Since his exile she hath despised me most,
Forsworn my company, and railed at me,
That I am desperate of obtaining her.
This weak impress of love is as a figure
Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat
Dissolves to water, and doth lose his form.
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
How now, Sir Proteus? is your countryman,
According to our proclamation, gone?
My daughter takes his going grievously.
A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
So I believe; but Thurio thinks not so.
Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee
(For thou hast shown some sign of good desert)
Makes me the better to confer with thee.
Longer than I prove loyal to your Grace 
Let me not live to look upon your Grace.
Thou know'st how willingly I would effect 
The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter? 
And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
How she opposes her against my will?
She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
Ay, and perversely she persevers so.
What might we do to make the girl forget
The love of Valentine, and love Sir Thurio?
The best way is to slander Valentine
With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent,
Three things that women highly hold in hate.
Ay, but she'll think that it is spoke in hate.
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
Then you must undertake to slander him.
And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:
'Tis an ill office for a gentleman,
Especially against his very friend.
Where your good word cannot advantage him, 
Your slander never can endamage him;
Therefore the office is indifferent, 
Being entreated to it by your friend. 
You have prevailed, my lord; if I can do it
By aught that I can speak in his dispraise,
She shall not long continue love to him.
But say this weed her love from Valentine,
It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
Lest it should ravel and be good to none,
You must provide to bottom it on me;
Which must be done by praising me as much
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind,
Because we know (on Valentine's report)
You are already Love's firm votary,
And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.
Upon this warrant shall you have access
Where you with Silvia may confer at large --
For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy,
And (for your friend's sake) will be glad of you --
Where you may temper her by your persuasion
To hate young Valentine and love my friend. 
As much as I can do, I will effect.
But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough: 
You must lay lime to tangle her desires 
By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes
Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows.
Ay, much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
Say that upon the altar of her beauty
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart;
Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
Moist it again, and frame some feeling line
That may discover such integrity:
For Orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews,
Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,
Make tigers tame, and huge leviathans
Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands.
After your dire-lamenting elegies,
Visit by night your lady's chamber-window
With some sweet consort; to their instruments
Tune a deploring dump -- the night's dead silence
Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance.
This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
This discipline shows thou hast been in love.
And thy advice this night I'll put in practice: 
Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver,
Let us into the city presently 
To sort some gentlemen well skilled in music. 
I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
To give the onset to thy good advice.
We'll wait upon your Grace till after supper,
And afterward determine our proceedings.
Even now about it!  I will pardon you.
Fellows, stand fast; I see a passenger.
If there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
Stand, sir, and throw us that you have about ye.
If not, we'll make you sit, and rifle you.
Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
That all the travellers do fear so much.
That's not so, sir; we are your enemies.
Then know that I have little wealth to lose. 
A man I am crossed with adversity;
My riches are these poor habiliments,
Of which if you should here disfurnish me,
You take the sum and substance that I have.
Whither travel you?  To Verona.
Some sixteen months, and longer might have stayed,
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
For that which now torments me to rehearse:
I killed a man, whose death I much repent,
But yet I slew him manfully in fight,
Without false vantage, or base treachery.
Why, ne'er repent it, if it were done so.
But were you banished for so small a fault?
I was, and held me glad of such a doom.
My youthful travel therein made me happy,
Or else I often had been miserable.
By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar,
This fellow were a king for our wild faction! 
It's an honorable kind of thievery. 
Tell us this: have you any thing to take to?
Know then, that some of us are gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungoverned youth
Thrust from the company of aweful men.
Myself was from Verona banished
For practicing to steal away a lady,
[An] heir, and [near] allied unto the Duke.
And I from Mantua, for a gentleman,
Who, in my mood, I stabbed unto the heart.
And I for such like petty crimes as these.
But to the purpose -- for we cite our faults
That they may hold excused our lawless lives;
And partly, seeing you are beautified
With goodly shape, and by your own report
A linguist, and a man of such perfection
As we do in our quality much want --
Indeed because you are a banished man,
Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you: 
Are you content to be our general?
To make a virtue of necessity 
And live as we do in this wilderness? 
What say'st thou? wilt thou be of our consort?
Say "ay" and be the captain of us all:
We'll do thee homage and be ruled by thee,
Love thee as our commander and our king.
But if thou scorn our courtesy, thou diest.
Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offered.
I take your offer, and will live with you,
Provided that you do no outrages
On silly women or poor passengers.
No, we detest such vile base practices.
Come, go with us, we'll bring thee to our crews,
And show thee all the treasure we have got;
Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
Already have I been false to Valentine,
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio:
Under the color of commending him, 
I have access my own love to prefer --
But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy, 
To be corrupted with my worthless gifts. 
When I protest true loyalty to her,
She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
When to her beauty I commend my vows,
She bids me think how I have been forsworn
In breaking faith with Julia whom I loved;
And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
The least whereof would quell a lover's hope,
Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love,
The more it grows, and fawneth on her still.
But here comes Thurio. Now must we to her window,
And give some evening music to her ear.
How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?
Ay, gentle Thurio, for you know that love
Will creep in service where it cannot go.
Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.
Who? Silvia? Ay, Silvia -- for your sake. 
I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,
Let's tune, and to it lustily a while. 
 
But shall I hear him speak? Ay, that you shall.
That will be music. Hark, hark! Is he among these?
You mistake; the musician likes me not.
You would have them always play but one thing?
I would always have one play but one thing.
But, host, doth this Sir Proteus that we talk on
Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
I tell you what Launce, his man, told me:
Peace, stand aside, the company parts.
Sir Thurio, fear not you, I will so plead,
That you shall say my cunning drift excels.
Where meet we? At Saint Gregory's well. Farewell.
Madam, good ev'n to your ladyship. 
I thank you for your music, gentlemen. 
One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth,
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
What's your will? That I may compass yours.
You have your wish: my will is even this,
That presently you hie you home to bed.
Thou subtile, perjured, false, disloyal man,
Think'st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
To be seduced by thy flattery,
That hast deceived so many with thy vows?
Return, return, and make thy love amends.
For me (by this pale queen of night I swear),
I am so far from granting thy request,
That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit,
And by and by intend to chide myself
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady; 
But she is dead. 'Twere false, if I should speak it; 
For I am sure she is not buried. 
Say that she be; yet Valentine thy friend
I am betrothed; and art thou not ashamed
To wrong him with thy importunacy?
I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
And so suppose am I; for in [his] grave
Assure thyself my love is buried.
Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence,
Or at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
To that I'll speak, to that I'll sigh and weep;
For since the substance of your perfect self
Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;
And to your shadow will I make true love.
If 'twere a substance, you would sure deceive it, 
And make it but a shadow, as I am.
I am very loath to be your idol, sir; 
But since your falsehood shall become you well 
To worship shadows and adore false shapes,
Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it;
And so, good rest. As wretches have o'ernight
That wait for execution in the morn.
By my halidom, I was fast asleep.
Not so; but it hath been the longest night
That e'er I watched, and the most heaviest.
This is the hour that Madam Silvia
Entreated me to call and know her mind.
There's some great matter she'ld employ me in.
Madam, madam!  Who calls? Your servant and your friend;
One that attends your ladyship's command.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
As many, worthy lady, to yourself.
According to your ladyship's impose,
I am thus early come to know what service
It is your pleasure to command me in.
O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman --
Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not --
Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplished:
Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
I bear unto the banished Valentine,
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
Vain Thurio, whom my very soul [abhors].
Thyself hast loved, and I have heard thee say
No grief did ever come so near thy heart
As when thy lady and thy true-love died,
Upon whose grave thou vowedst pure chastity. 
Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode; 
And for the ways are dangerous to pass, 
I do desire thy worthy company,
Upon whose faith and honor I repose.
Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,
But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,
And on the justice of my flying hence,
To keep me from a most unholy match,
Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
I do desire thee, even from a heart
As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
To bear me company, and go with me;
If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
That I may venture to depart alone.
Madam, I pity much your grievances,
Which since I know they virtuously are placed,
I give consent to go along with you,
Reaking as little what betideth me,
As much I wish all good befortune you.
When a man's servant shall play the cur
Didst thou ever see me do such a trick?
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well, 
And will employ thee in some service presently.
In what you please; I'll do what I can.
I hope thou wilt.   How now, you whoreson peasant,
Where have you been these two days loitering?
And what says she to my little jewel?
What, didst thou offer her this from me?
Go, get thee hence, and find my dog again, 
Or ne'er return again into my sight.
Away, I say! stayest thou to vex me here? 
A slave, that still an end turns me to shame!
Partly that I have need of such a youth
That can with some discretion do my business --
For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout --
But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior,
Which (if my augury deceive me not)
Witness good bringing up, fortune, and truth:
Therefore know [thou], for this I entertain thee.
Go presently, and take this ring with thee,
Deliver it to Madam Silvia --
She loved me well delivered it to me.
It seems you loved not her, [to] leave her token:
She is dead, belike? Not so; I think she lives.
Why dost thou cry "alas"? I cannot choose
Because methinks that she loved you as well 
As you do love your lady Silvia: 
She dreams on him that has forgot her love;
You dote on her that cares not for your love.
'Tis pity love should be so contrary;
And thinking on it makes me cry "alas!"
Well, give her that ring and therewithal
This letter; that's her chamber. Tell my lady
I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.
Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
Where thou shalt find me sad and solitary.
How many women would do such a message?
Alas, poor Proteus, thou hast entertained
A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him
That with his very heart despiseth me?
Because he loves her, he despiseth me;
Because I love him, I must pity him.
This ring I gave him when he parted from me,
To bind him to remember my good will;
And now am I (unhappy messenger)
To plead for that which I would not obtain, 
To carry that which I would have refused,
To praise his faith which I would have dispraised. 
I am my master's true confirmed love; 
But cannot be true servant to my master,
Unless I prove false traitor to myself.
Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.
Gentlewoman, good day; I pray you be my mean
To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
What would you with her, if that I be she?
If you be she, I do entreat your patience
To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
From whom? From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
O, he sends you for a picture? Ay, madam.
Go give your master this. Tell him from me,
One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
Pardon me, madam, I have unadvised 
Delivered you a paper that I should not:
This is the letter to your ladyship. 
I pray thee let me look on that again. 
It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
I will not look upon your master's lines;
I know they are stuffed with protestations,
And fill of new-found oaths, which he will break
As easily as I do tear his paper.
Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
The more shame for him that he sends it me;
For I have heard him say a thousand times
His Julia gave it him at his departure:
Though his false finger have profaned the ring,
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
I thank you, madam, that you tender her.
Poor gentlewoman, my master wrongs her much.
Almost as well as I do know myself.
To think upon her woes I do protest
That I have wept a hundred several times. 
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her? 
I think she doth; and that's her cause of sorrow. 
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is:
When she did think my master loved her well,
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you;
But since she did neglect her looking-glass,
And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks,
And pinched the lily-tincture of her face,
That now she is become as black as I.
About my stature; for at pentecost,
When all our pageants of delight were played,
Our youth got me to play the woman's part,
And I was trimmed in Madam Julia's gown,
Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,
As if the garment had been made for me;
Therefore I know she is about my height.
And at that time I made her weep agood,
For I did play a lamentable part.
For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight;
Which I so lively acted with my tears 
That my poor mistress, moved therewithal, 
Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow.
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
I weep myself to think upon thy words.
Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this
For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lov'st her.
And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.
A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful!
I hope my master's suit will be but cold,
Since she respects my mistress' love so much.
Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
Here is her picture: let me see; I think
If I had such a tire, this face of mine
Were full as lovely as is this of hers;
And yet the painter flattered her a little,
Unless I flatter with myself too much.
Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow: 
If that be all the difference in his love,
I'll get me such a colored periwig. 
Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine; 
Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.
What should it be that he respects in her,
But I can make respective in myself,
If this fond Love were not a blinded go
Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up, 
For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,
Thou shalt be worshipped, kissed, loved, and adored; 
And were there sense in his idolatry, 
My substance should be statue in thy stead.
I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake
That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow,
I should have scratched out your unseeing eyes,
To make my master out of love with thee.  
The sun begins to gild the western sky,
And now it is about the very hour
That Silvia at Friar Patrick's cell should meet me.
She will not fail, for lovers break not hours,
Unless it be to come before their time,
See where she comes. Lady, a happy evening!
Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,
Out at the postern by the abbey wall;
I fear I am attended by some spies. 
Fear not: the forest is not three leagues off;
If we recover that, we are sure enough.
Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit?
O, sir, I find her milder than she was,
And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
I'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
But love will not be spurred to what it loathes.
Nay then the wanton lies; my face is black.
But pearls are fair; and the old saying is,
Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
'Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies' eyes,
For I had rather wink than look on them. 
But well, when I discourse of love and peace. 
But better indeed, when you hold [your] peace.
She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
That they are out by lease. Here comes the Duke.
How now, Sir Proteus? how now, Thurio?
Which of you saw Eglamour of late? Not I.  
Nor I.  Saw you my daughter?  Neither.  Why then
She's fled unto that peasant Valentine;
And Eglamour is in her company.
'Tis true; for Friar Laurence met them both,
As he in penance wandered through the forest;
Him he knew well, and guessed that it was she,
But being masked, he was not sure of it;
At Patrick's cell this even, and there she was not.
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence:
Therefore I pray you stand not to discourse,
But mount you presently and meet with me
Upon the rising of the mountain foot
That leads toward Mantua, whither they are fled.
Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl,
That flies her fortune when it follows her.
I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour
Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
And I will follow, more for Silvia's love
Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her.
And I will follow, more to cross that love
Than hate for Silvia, that is gone for love.
Be patient; we must bring you to our captain.
A thousand more mischances than this one
Have learned me how to brook this patiently.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,
But Moyses and Valerius follow him.
Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;
There is our captain. We'll follow him that's fled --
The thicket is beset, he cannot scape.
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave.
Fear not; he bears an honorable mind,
And will not use a woman lawlessly.
O Valentine, this I endure for thee!  
How use doth breed a habit in a man!
This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods, 
I better brook than flourishing peopled towns: 
Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
And to the nightingale's complaining notes
Tune my distresses and record my woes.
O thou that dost inhabit in my breast,
Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
Lest growing ruinous, the building fall
And leave no memory of what it was!
Repair me with thy presence, Silvia;
Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain.
What hallowing and what stir is this today?
These are my mates, that make their wills their law,
Have some unhappy passenger in chase.
They love me well; yet I have much to do
To keep them from uncivil outrages.
Withdraw thee, Valentine: who's this comes here?
Madam, this service I have done for you 
(Though you respect not aught your servant doth)
To hazard life, and rescue you from him 
That would have forced your honor and your love. 
Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look:
A smaller boon than this I cannot beg,
And less than this, I am sure you cannot give.
How like a dream is this!  I see, and hear:
Love, lend me patience to forbear a while.
O miserable, unhappy that I am!
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;
But by my coming I have made you happy.
By thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy.
And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
Had I been seized by a hungry lion,
I would have been a breakfast to the beast
Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
O heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!
And full as much (for more there cannot be)
I do detest false perjured Proteus.
Therefore be gone, solicit me no more. 
What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
Would I not undergo for one calm look? 
O,'tis the curse in love, and still approved, 
When women cannot love where they're beloved!
When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved!
Read over Julia's heart (thy first best love),
For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
Descended into perjury, to love me.
Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two,
And that's far worse than none: better have none
That plural faith, which is too much by one.
Thou counterfeit to thy true friend! In love
Who respects friend? All men but Proteus.
Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
Can no way change you to a milder form,
I'll woo you like a soldier, at arm's end,
And love you 'gainst the nature of love -- force ye.
O heaven! I'll force thee yield to my desire.
Ruffian! let go that rude uncivil touch,
Thou friend of an ill fashion!  Valentine! 
Thou common friend, that's without faith or love,
For such is a friend now! treacherous man,
Thou hast beguiled my hopes! Nought but mine eye
Could have persuaded me; now I dare not say
I have one friend alive; thou wouldst disprove me.
Who should be trusted, when one's right hand
Is perjured to the bosom?  Proteus,
I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
The private wound is deepest: O time most accurst!
'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
Forgive me, Valentine; if hearty sorrow
Be a sufficient ransom for offense,
I tender't here: I do as truly suffer
As e'er I did commit. Then I am paid;
And once again I do receive thee honest.
Who by repentance is not satisfied 
Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased;
By penitence th' Eternal's wrath's appeased: 
And that my love may appear plain and free, 
All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
Here 'tis; this is it.   How? let me see.
Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook;
This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
But how cam'st thou by this ring?  At my depart
And Julia herself did give it me,
And Julia herself hath brought it hither. 
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths, 
And entertained 'em deeply in her heart. 
How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root?
O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!
Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me
Such an immodest raiment -- if shame live
It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
Than men their minds? 'tis true.  O heaven, were man
But constant, he were perfect; that one error
Fills him with faults; makes him run through all th' sins:
Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.
What is in Silvia's face, but I may spy
More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
Let me be blest to make this happy close; 
'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
Bear witness heaven I have my wish for ever. 
And I mine. A prize, a prize, a prize!
Your Grace is welcome to a man disgraced,
Banished Valentine. Sir Valentine!
Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy death;
Come not within the measure of my wrath.
Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,
[Milan] shall not hold thee. Here she stands,
Take but possession of her with a touch:
I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;
I hold him but a fool that will endanger
His body for a girl that loves him not.
I claim her not, and therefore she is thine. 
The more degenerate and base art thou
To make such means for her as thou hast done, 
Now, by the honor of my ancestry,
I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
And think thee worthy of an empress' love.
Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
Plead a new state in thy unrivalled merit,
To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine,
Thou art a gentleman and well derived,
Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.
I thank your Grace; the gift hath made me happy.
I now beseech you (for your daughter's sake)
To grant one boon that I shall ask of you.
I grant it (for thine own) what e'er it be.
These banished men, that I have kept withal,
Are men endued with worthy qualities.
Forgive them what they have committed here,
And let them be recalled from their exile;
They are reformed, civil, full of good,
And fit for great employment, worthy lord. 
Thou hast prevailed, I pardon them and thee; 
Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts. 
Come, let us go, we will include all jars
With triumphs, mirth, and rare solemnity.
And as we walk along, I dare be bold
With our discourse to make your Grace to smile.
I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
I warrant you, my lord -- more grace than boy.
Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,
Come, Proteus,'tis your penance but to hear
The story of your loves discovered;
That done, our day of marriage shall be yours,
One feast, one house, one mutual happiness. 
<LLLVS> Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live regist'red upon our brazen tombs,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
When spite of cormorant devouring Time,
Th' endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honor which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors -- for so you are,
And the huge army of the world's desires --
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force: 
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little academe, 
Still and contemplative in living art. 
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me,
My fellow scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here.
Your oaths are passed, and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honor down
That violates the smallest branch herein.
If you are armed to do, as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved, 'tis but a three years' fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine;
Fat paunches have lean pates; and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrout quite the wits.
My loving lord, Dumaine is mortified:
The grosser manner of these world's delights
He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves;
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
With all these living in philosophy.
I can but say their protestation over:
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn, 
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances: 
As not to see a woman in that term, 
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food,
And but one meal on every day beside,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day --
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day --
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep.
Your oath is passed to pass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege, and if you please:
I only swore to study with your Grace,
And stay here in your court for three years' space.
You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know.
Why, that to know which else we should not know.
Things hid and barred (you mean) from common sense. 
Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.
Com' on then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus -- to study where I well may dine,
When I to [feast] expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
Study to break it and not break my troth.
If study's gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Why? all delights are vain, but that most vain
Which, with pain purchased, doth inherit pain:
As, painfully to pore upon a book
To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
Light, seeking light, doth light of light beguile; 
So ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes. 
Study me how to please the eye indeed 
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
That will not be deep searched with saucy looks;
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others' books.
These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights,
That give a name to every fixed star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!                         
He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
How follows that? Fit in his place and time. 
In reason nothing. Something then in rhyme.
Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Well, say I am, why should proud summer boast
Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows;
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
Well, sit you out; go home, Berowne; adieu.
No, my good lord, I have sworn to stay with you;                         
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet, confident, I'll keep what I have sworn,
And bide the penance of each three years' day. 
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name. 
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
within a mile of my court" -- Hath this been
losing her tongue."   Who devised this penalty?
Marry, that did I. Sweet lord, and why?
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
A dangerous law against gentility. 
This article, my liege, yourself must break,
For well you know here comes in embassy
The French king's daughter with yourself to speak --
A maid of grace and complete majesty -- 
About surrender up of Aquitaine
To her decrepit, sick, and bedred father; 
Therefore this article is made in vain, 
Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.
What say you, lords?  Why, this was quite forgot.
So study evermore is overshot:
While it doth study to have what it would,
It doth forget to do the thing it should;
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
'Tis won as towns with fire -- so won, so lost.
We must of force dispense with this decree,
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years' space;
For every man with his affects is born,
Not by might mast'red, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
I am forsworn "on mere necessity."
So to the laws at large I write my name, 
And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
Suggestions are to other as to me; 
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath. 
But is there no quick recreation granted? 
Ay, that there is.  Our court you know is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain,
A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
One who the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpeer of their mutiny.
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate,
In high-borne words, the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain, lost in the world's debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport, 
And so to study three cars is but short.
Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning
Will you hear this letter with attention?
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken 
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er,
And go we, lords, to put in practice that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
I'll lay my head to any good man's hat, 
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
It was so, sir, for she had a green wit.
My love is most immaculate white and red.
Define, define, well-educated infant.
My father's wit and my mother's tongue assist me!                         
I will tell thee wonders. With that face?
So I heard you say. And so farewell.
Take away this villain, shut him up.
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits;
Consider who the King your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear,
When she did starve the general world beside
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye, 
Not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues.
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth 
Than you much willing to be counted wise 
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court;
Therefore to 's seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
[Importunes] personal conference with his Grace.
Haste, signify so much, while we attend,
Like humble[-visaged] suitors, his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, my loving lords, 
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous Duke?
[Lord] Longaville is one.  Know you the man? 
I know him, madam; at a marriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville,
A man of sovereign [parts, peerless] esteemed,
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms;
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will,
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking lord belike, is't so?
They say so most that most his humors know.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
The young Dumaine, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved; 
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good, 
And shape to win grace though he had no wit. 
I saw him at the Duke Alanson's once,
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these students at that time
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hour's talk withal.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished,
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God bless my ladies! are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet. Now, what admittance, lord?
Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all addressed to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
To let you enter his [unpeopled] house.
Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre. 
"Fair" I give you back again, and "welcome"
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
I will be welcome then -- conduct me thither. 
Hear me, dear lady: I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it, will, and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your Grace hath sworn out house-keeping:
'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold;
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
You will the sooner, that I were away,
For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once? 
I know you did. How needless was it then
To ask the question? You must not be so quick. 
'Tis long of you that spur me with such questions. 
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
What time a' day? The hour that fools should ask.
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he, or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the money's worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied, 
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his Majesty. 
But that, it seems, he little purposeth: 
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns, and not demands,
[On] payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine;
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Than Aquitaine, so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.
You do the King my father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heard of it;
And, if you prove it, I'll repay it back,
Or yield up Aquitaine. We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produce acquittances 
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father. Satisfy me so. 
So please your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound:
tomorrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me; at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Mean time receive such welcome at my hand
As honor (without breach of honor) may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
You may not come, fair Princess, within my gates,
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbor in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
tomorrow shall we visit you again.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your Grace!
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
Lady, I will commend you to [mine own] heart.
Pray you, do my commendations -- I would 
I would you heard it groan. Is the fool sick?
Sick at the heart. Alack, let it blood.
Would that do it good? My physic says ay.
No point, with my knife. Now God save thy life!
And yours from long living! I cannot stay thanksgiving.
Sir, I pray you a word.  What lady is that same?
The heir of Alanson, [Katherine] her name.
A gallant lady.  Monsieur, fare you well.
I beseech you a word.  What is she in the white?
A woman sometimes, and you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light.  I desire her name.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
That last is Berowne, the merry madcap lord.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
Two hot sheeps, marry. And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me Not so, gentle beast.
My lips are no common, though  several they be.
Belonging to whom?  To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling, but, gentles, agree:                          
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
If my observation (which very seldom lies),
By the heart's still rhetoric, disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
With what? With that which we lovers entitle
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
His heart like an agot with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Methought all his senses were locked in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy, 
Who tend'ring their own worth from where they were glassed, 
Did point you to buy them, along as you passed; 
His face's own margent did cote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
Come to our pavilion -- Boyet is disposed.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclosed.
Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skillfully.
He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
Fetch hither the swain, he must carry me a letter.
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
He reputes me a cannon, and the bullet, that's he;
I shoot thee at the swain. Thump then, and I flee.   
By thy favor, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, valor gives thee place.
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, and your goose be fat.
Fell over the threshold, and broke my shin.
We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances!  I smell some
My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
I will never buy and sell out of this word.
As thou wilt win my favor, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
Well, I will do it, sir; fare you well.
I will come to your worship tomorrow morning.
The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady:
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her,
And to her white hand see thou do commend 
This sealed-up counsel. There's thy guerdon;  go.
A very beadle to a humorous sigh,
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable,
A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
This senior[-junior], giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid,
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
Th' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malecontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting paritors (O my little heart!),
And I to be a corporal of his field,
And wear his colors like a tumbler's hoop!
What!  I love, I sue, I seek a wife --
A woman, that is like a German [clock], 
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch, 
But being watched that it may still go right! 
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And among three to love the worst of all,
A whitely wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
Ay, and, by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her, go to!  It is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, groan:
Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.
Was that the King that spurred his horse so hard 
Against the steep uprising of the hill? 
I know not, but I think it was not he.
Whoe'er 'a was, 'a showed a mounting mind.
Well,  lords, today we shall have our dispatch;
[On] Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murtherer in?
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice,
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
What, what?  First praise me, and again say no?
O short-lived pride!  Not fair? alack for woe!
Yes, madam, fair. Nay, never paint me now;
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here (good my glass), take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words is more than due. 
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See, see, my beauty will be saved by merit. 
O  heresy in fair, fit for these days! 
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise' sake, when they strive to be
Only for praise -- and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
God dig-you-den all!  Pray you, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
And your waist, mistress, were as slender as 
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey; 
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play. 
But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then? 
Food for his rage, repasture for his den."
This Armado is  a Spaniard that keeps here in court,
Who gave thee this letter? I told you: my lord.
To whom shouldst thou give it? From my lord to my lady.
From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he called Rosaline. 
Thou hast mistaken his letter.  Come, lords, away.
Why, she that bears the bow. Finely put off!
My lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on! Well then I am the shooter.
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
By my troth, most pleasant.   How both did fit it!
A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit [it].
A mark!  O, mark but that mark! a mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
Wide a' the bow-hand!  I' faith, your hand is out.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the [pin].
Come, come, you talk greasily, your lips grow foul.
I fear too much rubbing.  Good night, my good owl.      
By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
I assure ye it was a buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo for a deer. 
'Twas not a haud credo, 'twas a pricket.
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
God give you good morrow, Master Person.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse;
"So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light.
Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep,
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show.
But do not love thyself, then thou [wilt] keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O queen of queens, how far dost thou excel
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell."
How shall she know my griefs?  I'll drop the paper. 
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
What, Longaville, and reading!  Listen, ear.
Now in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
In love, I hope -- sweet fellowship in shame.
One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move. 
O sweet Maria, empress of my love,
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose! 
O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
Disfigure not his shop. This same shall go. 
"Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore, but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee.
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gained cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapor is;
Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
Exhal'st this vapor-vow; in thee it is.
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
To lose an oath to win a paradise?"
A green goose a goddess; pure, pure [idolatry]. 
By whom shall I send this? -- Company? Stay.
"All hid, all hid," an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'er-eye.
More sacks to the mill!  O heavens, I have my wish!
Dumaine transformed! four woodcocks in a dish!
O most divine Kate! O most profane coxcomb!
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.
Her amber hairs for foul hath amber coted.
An amber-colored raven was well noted.
As upright as the cedar. Stoop, I say,
Her shoulder is with child. As fair as day.
Ay, as some days, but then no sun must shine. 
O that I had my wish! And I had mine! 
I would forget her, but a fever she
Reigns in my blood, and will rememb'red be.
A fever in your blood! why then incision
Would let her out in saucers. Sweet misprision!
Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
This will I send and something else more plain
That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
O would the King, Berowne, and Longaville
Were lovers too!  Ill, to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note:
For none offend where all alike do dote.
Dumaine, thy love is far from charity,
That in love's grief desir'st society:
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
Come, sir, you blush; as his your case is such;
You chide at him, offending twice as much. 
You do not love Maria?  Longaville 
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
"Ay me!" says one "O Jove!" the other cries;
You would for paradise break faith and troth,
And Jove for your love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy. 
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me! 
Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove 
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no [coaches;] in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears;
You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed?  Nay, are you not,
All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
You found his mote, the King your mote did see;
But I a beam do find in each of three.
O, what a scene of fool'ry have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Salomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumaine?
And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? All about the breast! 
A caudle ho! Too bitter is thy jest. 
Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view? 
Not you by me, but I betrayed to you:
I that am honest, I that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men like [you], men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme,
Or groan for Joan, or spend a minute's time
In pruning me?  When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A leg, a limb -- Soft, whither away so fast?
A true man, or a thief, that gallops so?
I post from love; good lover, let me go.
God bless the King! What present hast thou there?
Some certain treason.  What makes treason here?
The treason and you go in peace away together.
I beseech your Grace let this letter be read:
Our person misdoubts it; 'twas treason, he said.
Berowne, read it over. Where hadst thou it?
How now, what is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
It is Berowne's writing, and here is his name.
Guilty, my lord, guilty!  I confess, I confess.
He, he, and you -- and you, my liege! -- and I,
Will these turtles be gone? Hence, sirs, away!
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.  
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
As true we are as flesh and blood can be.
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline, 
That (like a rude and savage man of Inde),
At the first op'ning of the gorgeous east, 
Bows not his vassal head, and strooken blind, 
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?
What zeal, what fury, hath inspired thee now?
My love (her mistress) is a gracious moon,
She (an attending star) scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the culled sovereignty
Do meet as at a fair in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues --
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not.
To things of sale a seller's praise belongs:
She passes praise, then praise too short doth blot.
A withered hermit, fivescore winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye: 
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new born,
And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy. 
O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine! 
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O [wood] divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath?  Where is a book?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.
O paradox!  Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
O, if in black my lady's brows be decked,
It mourns that painting [and] usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect:
And therefore is she born to make black fair.
Her favor turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now;
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow. 
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black. 
And since her time are colliers counted bright.
And Ethiops of their sweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colors should be washed away.
'Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
I'll find a fairer face not washed today.
I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
Look, here's thy love my foot and her face see.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
O vile! then as she goes what upward lies
The street should see as she walked overhead. 
But what of this, are we not all in love?
O, nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn. 
Then leave this chat, and, good Berowne, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Ay marry, there -- some flattery for this evil.
O, some authority how to proceed;
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.  O, 'tis more than need.
Have at you then, affection's men-at-arms. 
Consider what you first did swear unto: 
To fast, to study, and to see no woman --
Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast?  Your stomachs are too young,
And abstinence engenders maladies.
(And where that you have vowed to study, lords,
In that each of you have forsworn his book,
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?
For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of study's excellence
Without the beauty of a woman's face?
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
They are the ground, the books, the academes,
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.
Why, universal plodding poisons up
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long-during action tires
The sinowy vigor of the traveller.
Now for not looking on a woman's face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes,
And study too, the causer of your vow. 
For where is any author in the world
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye? 
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself, 
And where we are, our learning likewise is.
Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
Do we not likewise see our learning there?)
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors have enriched you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
And therefore, finding barren practicers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain,
But with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye: 
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind.
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound, 
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped. 
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails.
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.
For valor, is not Love a Hercules,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtile as Sphinx, as sweet and musical
As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair.
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were temp'red with Love's sighs:
O then his lines would ravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
They are the books, the arts, the academes,
That show, contain, and nourish all the world,
Else none at all in aught proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools. 
For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love,
Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men, 
Or for men's sake, the [authors] of these women, 
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,
[Let] us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn:
For charity itself fulfills the law,
And who can sever love from charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing, lay these glozes by:
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
And win them too; therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them, 
Such as the shortness of the time can shape,
For revels, dances, masks, and merry hours 
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers. 
Away, away, no time shall be omitted
That will be time, and may by us be fitted.
And justice always whirls in equal measure:
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.    
What is the figure? What is the figure? Horns. 
Thou disputes like an infant; go whip thy gig.
Most dull, honest Dull! to our sport; away!
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A lady walled about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving King.
Madam, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this?  Yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be crammed up in a sheet of paper,
Writ a' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
For he hath been five thousand year a boy.
Ay, and a shrowd unhappy gallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends with him, 'a killed your sister.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy,
And so she died.  Had she been light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit, 
She might 'a' been [a] grandam ere she died.
And so may you; for a light heart lives long. 
What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty dark.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not?  O, that's you care not for me.
Great reason:  for past care is still past cure.
Well bandied both, a set of wit well played.
But, Rosaline, you have a favor too?
Who sent it? and what is it? I would you knew.
And if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favor were as great: be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne; 
The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground. 
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs. 
O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink -- a good conclusion.
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
Ware pencils [ho]!  let me not die your debtor,
My red dominical, my golden letter:
O that your face were not so full of O's!
A pox of that jest! and I beshrow all shrows.
But, Katherine, what was sent to you from fair
Madam, this glove. Did he not send you twain?
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover.
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vildly compiled, profound simplicity.
This, and these [pearls], to me sent Longaville. 
The letter is too long by half a mile.
I think no less.  Dost thou not wish in heart 
The chain were longer and the letter short? 
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go.
O that I knew he were but in by th' week!
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
And shape his service wholly to my device,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So pair-taunt-like would I o'ersway his state
That he should be my fool and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catched,
As wit turned fool; folly, in wisdom hatched,
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
The blood of youth burns not with such excess 
As gravity's revolt to [wantonness].
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note 
As fool'ry in the wise, when wit doth dote, 
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
O, I am [stabbed] with laughter!  Where's her Grace?
Thy news, Boyet? Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
Against your peace.  Love doth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments -- you'll be surprised.
Muster your wits, stand in your own defense,
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us?  Say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
When lo, to interrupt my purposed rest, 
Toward that shade I might behold addressed
The King and his companions. Warily 
I stole into a neighbor thicket by, 
And overheard what you shall overhear:
That by and by disguised [they] will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
That well by heart hath conned his embassage.
Action and accent did they teach him there:
"Thus must thou speak," and "thus thy body bear",
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out;
"For," quoth the King,"an angel shalt thou see;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously."
The boy replied, "An angel is not evil;
I should have feared her had she been a devil."
With that all laughed, and clapped him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
One rubbed his elbow thus, and fleered, and swore
A better speech was never spoke before.
Another, with his finger and his thumb,
Cried,"Via! we will do't, come what will come."
The third he capered, and cried, "All goes well."
The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell. 
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound, 
That in this spleen ridiculous appears, 
To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?
They do, they do; and are apparelled thus,
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parley, to court, and dance,
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress, which they'll know
By favors several which they did bestow.
And will they so?  The gallants shall be tasked:
For, ladies, we will every one be masked,
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favor thou shalt wear,
And then the King will court thee for his dear.
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change you favors too, so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on then, wear the favors most in sight. 
But in this changing, what is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs: 
They do it but in mockery merriment, 
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mocked withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penned speech render we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke each turn away [her] face.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I do it, and I make no doubt
The rest will [ne'er] come in, if he be out.
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own;
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mocked, depart away with shame.
The trumpet sounds, be masked; the maskers come.
"All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!" -- 
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
"A holy parcel of the fairest dames
That ever turned their -- backs -- to mortal views!",
"That [ever] turned their eyes to mortal views!
"Out of your favors, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Not to behold" -- "Once to behold," rogue.
"Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
They will not answer to that epithet;
You were best call it "daughter-beamed eyes."
They do not mark me, and that brings me out. 
Is this your perfectness?  Be gone, you rogue!
What would these strangers?  Know their minds, Boyet.
If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would. What would you with the Princess?
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
Why, that they have, and bid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
Say to her we have measured many miles,
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
They say that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
It is not so.  Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile: if they have measured many,
The measure then of one is eas'ly told. 
If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the Princess bids you tell 
How many inches doth fill up one mile. 
Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.
She hears herself. How many weary steps
Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you;
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without accompt.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we (like savages) may worship it.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine
(Those clouds removed) upon our watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter,
Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg; this begging is not strange. 
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
Not yet; no dance: thus change I like the moon. 
Will you not dance?  How come you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays, vouchsafe some motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it. But your legs should do it.
Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,
We'll  not be nice; take hands. We will not dance.
Why take we hands then? Only to part friends.
Curtsy, sweet hearts -- and so the measure ends.
More measure of this measure; be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Price you yourselves; what buys your company?
Your absence only. That can never be. 
Then cannot we be bought; and so, adieu --
Twice to your visor, and half once to you. 
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat. 
In private then. I am best pleased with that.
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, and sugar: there is three.
Nay then two treys, and if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run, dice!
There's half a dozen sweets. Seventh sweet, adieu.
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
One word in secret. Let it not be sweet.
Thou grievest my gall. Gall! bitter.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.  Fair lady -- Say you so?  Fair lord -- 
Take that for your fair lady.  Please it you,
As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
O for your reason! quickly, sir, I long!
You have a double tongue within your mask, 
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
"Veal,"  quoth the Dutchman. Is  not veal a calf?
A calf, fair lady! No, a fair lord calf.
Let's part the word. No, I'll not be your half.
Take all and wean it, it may prove an ox.
Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns, chaste lady?  Do not so. 
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow. 
One word in private with you ere I die. 
Bleat softly then, the butcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the razor's edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen;
Above the sense of sense, so sensible
Seemeth their conference, their conceits have wings
Not one word more, my maids, break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches, you have simple wits.     
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puffed out.
Well-liking wits they have -- gross gross, fat fat. 
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
Will they not (think you) hang themselves tonight? 
Or ever but in vizards show their faces? 
This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
They were all in lamentable cases!
The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.
Berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
Dumaine was at my service, and his sword:
"No point," quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said I came o'er his heart,
And trow you what he called me? Qualm, perhaps.
Yes, in good faith. Go, sickness as thou art!
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? the King is my love sworn.
And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Dumaine is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes; for it can never be 
They will digest this harsh indignity.
Will they return?  They will, they will, God knows, 
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change favors, and when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Fair ladies masked are roses in their bud;
Dismasked, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels [vailing] clouds, or roses blown.
Avaunt, perplexity!  What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
Let's mock them still, as well known as disguised.
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vildly penned,
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our tent to us.
Ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our tents, as roes [run] o'er land. 
Fair sir, God save you!  Where's the Princess?
Gone to her tent.  Please it your Majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will, and so will she, I know, my lord.
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
And utters it again when God doth please.
He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs:
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
'A can carve too, and lisp; why, this is he
That kissed his hand away in courtesy; 
This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
That when he plays at tables chides the dice 
In honorable terms; nay, he can sing
A mean most meanly, and in hushering
Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet;
The stairs as he treads on them kiss his feet. 
This is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as whale's bone; 
And consciences that will not die in debt 
Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page out of his part!
See where it comes!  Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman showed thee?  And what art thou now?
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
"Fair" in "all hail" is foul, as I conceive.
Conster my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better, I will give you leave.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke: 
The virtue of your eye must break my oath. 
You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke,
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honor, yet as pure
As the unsallied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your house's guest:
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
O, you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
Not so, my lord, it is not so, I swear;
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game,
A  mess of Russians left us but of late.
How, madam?  Russians? Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord.
My lady (to the manner of the days)
In courtesy gives undeserving praise. 
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour, 
And talked apace; and in that hour, my lord, 
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish. When we greet,
With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light; your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish, and rich things but poor.
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye --
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
All the fool mine? I cannot give you less.
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this? 
There then, that vizard, that superfluous case, 
That hid the worse, and showed the better face. 
We were descried, they'll mock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Amazed, my lord?  Why looks your Highness sad?
Help, hold his brows, he'll sound!  Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I, lady, dart thy skill at me,
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches penned,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song! 
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affection, 
Figures pedantical -- these summer flies 
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
By this white glove (how white the hand, God knows!),
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes.
And to begin, wench, so God help me law!
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Sans "sans," I pray you. Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage. Bear with me, I am sick;
I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see --
Write "Lord have mercy on us" on those three:
They are infected, in their hearts it lies;
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
These lords are visited; you are not free,
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit, seek not to undo us. 
It is not so, for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue? 
Peace, for I will not have to do with you. 
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for yourselves, my wit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse. The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now, disguised?
Madam, I was. And were you well advised?
I was, fair madam. When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
That more than all the world I did respect her.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Upon mine honor, no. Peace, peace, forbear:
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me when I break this oath of mine. 
I will, and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear? 
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear 
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
God give thee joy of him!  The noble lord
Most honorably doth uphold his word.
What mean you, madam?  By my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.
By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,
You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.
My faith and this the Princess I did give;
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear,
And Lord Berowne (I thank him) is my dear.
What? will you have me, or your pearl again?
Neither of either; I remit both twain.
I see the trick an't; here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany, 
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick, 
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favors; and then we,
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn, in will and error.
Much upon this 'tis;  and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our page out. Go, you are allowed;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you?  There's an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword. Full merrily
Hath this brave [manage], this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace, I have done. 
Welcome, pure wit, thou part'st a fair fray.
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
That sport best pleases that doth [least] know how:
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents. 
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things laboring perish in their mirth.   
A right description of our sport, my lord.
"I Pompey am" -- You lie, you are not he.
"I Pompey am" -- With libbard's head on knee.
"I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big" --                         
It is "Great," sir. "Pompey surnamed the Great,
"Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
Whose club killed Cerberus, that three-headed canus.
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
Ergo I come with this apology."
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
"Judas I am, ycliped Machabeus."
Judas Machabeus clipt is plain Judas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
"Judas I am" -- The more shame for you, Judas.
What mean you, sir? To make Judas hang himself.
Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
I will not be put out of countenance. 
Because thou hast no face. What is this?
A cittern-head. The head of a bodkin.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
You have put me out of countenance.
And thou wert a lion, we would do so.
Therefore as he is, an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude!  Nay, why dost thou stay?
For the ass to the Jude; give it him. Judas, away!
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble. 
I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
He's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.
"The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty, 
Gave Hector a gift" -- A [gilt] nutmeg. 
A lemon. Stuck with cloves. No, cloven. Peace! -- 
"The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight, yea,
From morn till night, out of his pavilion.
I am that flower" --That mint. That columbine.
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
I do adore thy sweet Grace's slipper.
"This Hector far surmounted Hannibal.
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt;
But that thou interruptest our merriment.
I am sorry, madam, for the news I bring
Is heavy in my tongue.  The King your father --
Dead, for my life! Even so:  my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud. 
Boyet, prepare, I will away tonight.
Madam, not so, I do beseech you stay.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavors, and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse, or hide,
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If overboldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath -- your gentleness
Was guilty of it.  Farewell, worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not a humble tongue.
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtained.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often, at his very loose, decides
That which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny 
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince, 
Yet since love's argument was first on foot, 
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
From what it purposed; since to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
I understand you not, my griefs are double.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief,
And by these badges understand the King.
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Played foul play with our oaths.  Your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humors
Even to the opposed end of our intents;
And what in us hath seemed ridiculous --
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Formed by the eye and therefore like the eye,
Full of straying shapes, of habits, and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance;
Which parti-coated presence of loose love 
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities, 
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults, 
Suggested us to make.  Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false,
By being once false for ever to be true
To those that make us both -- fair ladies, you;
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
We have received your letters full of love;
Your favors, embassadors of love;
And in our maiden council rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time;
But more devout than this [in] our respects
Have we not been, and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters, madam, showed much more than jest. 
So did our looks. We did not cote them so.
Now at the latest minute of the hour, 
Grant us your loves. A time methinks too short 
To make a world-without-end bargain in. 
No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness, and therefore this:
If for my love (as there is no such cause)
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust, but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love
But that it bear this trial, and last love;
Then at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
I will be thine; and till that [instant] shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
For the remembrance of my father's death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part, 
Neither intitled in the other's heart. 
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
Hence [hermit] then -- my heart is in thy breast.
And what to me, my love? and what to me?
You must be purged too, your sins are racked,
You are attaint with faults and perjury:
Therefore if you my favor mean to get,
A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
But seek the weary beds of people sick.)
But what to me, my love? but what to me?
A wife? A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With threefold love I wish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord, a twelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say.
Come when the King doth to my lady come;
Then if I have much love, I'll give you some.
I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then. 
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
What says Maria?  At the twelvemonth's end
I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
I'll stay with patience, but the time is long.
The liker you; few taller are so young.
Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me,
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there.
Impose some service on me for thy love.
Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fructful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit, 
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death? 
It cannot be, it is impossible: 
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it; then if sickly ears,
Deafed with the clamors of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal;
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
A twelvemonth?  Well, befall what will befall, 
I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take my leave.
No, madam, we will bring you on your way. 
Our wooing doth not end like an old play:
Jack hath not Gill. These ladies' courtesy 
Might well have made our sport a comedy. 
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,
And then 'twill end. That's too long for a play.
Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me -- Was not that Hector?
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave.
<JNvs> Now say, Chatillion, what would France with us?
Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
In my behavior to the majesty,
The borrowed majesty, of England here.
A strange beginning:"borrowed majesty"!
Silence, good mother, hear the embassy. 
Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Of thy deceased brother Geffrey's son, 
Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim 
To this fair island and the territories,
To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
And put the same into young Arthur's hand,
Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.
What follows if we disallow of this?
The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
Here have we war for war and blood for blood,
Controlment for controlment: so answer France.
Then take my King's defiance from my mouth,
The farthest limit of my embassy.
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace.
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France;
For ere thou canst report, I will be there;
The thunder of my cannon shall be heard.
So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath, 
And sullen presage of your own decay.
An honorable conduct let him have. 
Pembroke, look to't. Farewell, Chatillion. 
What now, my son, have I not ever said
How that ambitious Constance would not cease
Till she had kindled France, and all the world,
Upon the right and party of her son?
This might have been prevented and made whole
With very easy arguments of love,
Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
Our strong possession and our right for us.
Your strong possession much more than your right, 
Or else it must go wrong with you and me;
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
Which none but heaven, and you, and I, shall hear.
My liege, here is the strangest controversy
Come from the country to be judged by you 
That e'er I heard. Shall I produce the men?
Our abbeys and our priories shall pay 
This [expedition's] charge. What men are you?
Your faithful subject I, a gentleman,
Born in Northamptonshire, and eldest son,
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
A soldier, by the honor-giving hand
Of Cordelion knighted in the field.
The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
You came not of one mother then, it seems.
Most certain of one mother, mighty King --
That is well known -- and, as I think, one father;
But for the certain knowledge of that truth
I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother.
Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.
Out on thee, rude man, thou dost shame thy mother, 
And wound her honor with this diffidence.
I, madam? No, I have no reason for it; 
That is my brother's plea and none of mine, 
The which if he can prove,'a pops me out
At least from fair five hundred pound a year.
Heaven guard my mother's honor, and my land!
A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born,
Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?
I know not why, except to get the land;
But once he slandered me with bastardy.
But whe'er I be as true begot or no,
That still I lay upon my mother's head,
But that I am as well begot, my liege
(Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!),
Compare our faces, and be judge yourself.
If old Sir Robert did beget us both,
And were our father, and this son like him,
O old Sir Robert, father, on my knee
I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!
Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!
He hath a trick of Cordelion's face, 
The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
Do you not read some tokens of my son 
In the large composition of this man? 
Mine eye hath well examined his parts,
And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
What doth move you to claim your brother's land?
Because he hath a half-face like my father!
With half that face would he have all my land --
A half-faced groat five hundred pound a year!
My gracious liege, when that my father lived,
Your brother did employ my father much --
Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land;
Your tale must be how he employed my mother.
And once dispatched him in an embassy
To Germany, there with the Emperor
To treat of high affairs touching that time.
Th' advantage of his absence took the King,
And in the mean time sojourned at my father's;
Where how he did prevail I shame to speak.
But truth is truth. Large lengths of seas and shores
Between my father and my mother lay,
As I have heard my father speak himself,
When this same lusty gentleman was got. 
Upon his death-bed he by will bequeathed
His lands to me, and took it on his death 
That this my mother's son was none of his; 
And if he were, he came into the world
Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine,
My father's land, as was my father's will.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate,
Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him;
And if she did play false, the fault was hers,
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
Who, as you say, took pains to get this son,
Had of your father claimed this son for his?
In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
This calf, bred from his cow, from all the world;
In sooth he might; then if he were my brother's,
My brother might not claim him, nor your father,
Being none of his, refuse him. This concludes:
My mother's son did get your father's heir;
Your father's heir must have your father's land.
Shall then my father's will be of no force
To dispossess that child which is not his? 
Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
Than was his will to get me, as I think. 
Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge, 
And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land;
Or the reputed son of Cordelion,
Lord of thy presence and no land beside?
Madam, and if my brother had my shape
And I had his, Sir Robert's his, like him,
And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
My arms such eel-skins stuffed, my face so thin
That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose
Lest men should say, "Look where three-farthings goes!"
And to his shape were heir to all this land,
Would I might never stir from off this place,
I would give it every foot to have this face;
It would not be Sir Nob in any case.
I like thee well. Wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
Bequeath thy land to him, and follow me?
I am a soldier, and now bound to France.
Brother, take you my land, I'll take my chance.
Your face hath got five hundred pound a year, 
Yet sell your face for five pence and 'tis dear.
Madam, I'll follow you unto the death. 
Nay, I would have you go before me thither. 
Our country manners give our betters way.
Philip, my liege, so is my name begun,
Philip, good old Sir Robert's wive's eldest son.
From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bearest:
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
Arise Sir Richard, and Plantagenet.
Brother by th' mother's side, give me your hand;
My father gave me honor, yours gave land.
Now blessed be the hour by night or day
When I was got, Sir Robert was away!
The very spirit of Plantagenet!
I am thy grandame, Richard, call me so.
Madam, by chance, but not by truth; what though?
Something about, a little from the right,
In at the window, or else o'er the hatch.
Who dares not stir by day must walk by night, 
And have is have, however men do catch.
Near or far off, well won is still well shot, 
And I am I, howe'er I was begot. 
Go, Faulconbridge, now hast thou thy desire,
A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed
For France, for France, for it is more than need.
Brother, adieu, good fortune come to thee!
For thou wast got i' th' way of honesty.
A foot of honor better than I was,
But many a many foot of land the worse,
Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
"Good den, Sir Richard!" "God-a-mercy, fellow!"
And if his name be George, I'll call him Peter;
For new-made honor doth forget men's names;
'Tis too respective and too sociable
For your conversion. Now your traveller,
He and his toothpick at my worship's mess,
And when my knightly stomach is sufficed,
Why then I suck my teeth, and catechize
My picked man of countries. "My dear sir," 
Thus, leaning on mine elbow, I begin,
"I shall beseech you" -- that is question now; 
And then comes answer like an Absey book: 
"O sir," says answer,"at your best command,
At your employment, at your service, sir."
"No, sir," says question,"I, sweet sir, at yours";
And so ere answer knows what question would,
Saving in dialogue of compliment,
And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
The Pyrenean and the river Po,
It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
But this is worshipful society,
And fits the mounting spirit like myself;
For he is but a bastard to the time
That doth not [smack] of observation --
And so am I, whether I smack or no;
And not alone in habit and device,
Exterior form, outward accoutrement,
But from the inward motion to deliver
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth,
Which though I will not practice to deceive,
Yet to avoid deceit, I mean to learn;
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising. 
But who comes in such haste in riding-robes?
What woman-post is this? Hath she no husband 
That will take pains to blow a horn before her? 
O me,'tis my mother. How now, good lady,
What brings you here to court so hastily?
Where is that slave, thy brother? Where is he,
That holds in chase mine honor up and down?
My brother Robert, old Sir Robert's son?
Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
Is it Sir Robert's son that you seek so?
Sir Robert's son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,
Sir Robert's son! Why scorn'st thou at Sir Robert?
He is Sir Robert's son, and so art thou.
James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave a while? 
Good leave, good Philip. Philip? sparrow! James,
There's toys abroad; anon I'll tell thee more.
Madam, I was not old Sir Robert's son;
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me 
Upon Good Friday and ne'er broke his fast. 
Sir Robert could do well -- marry, to confess --
Could [he] get me. Sir Robert could not do it;
We know his handiwork. Therefore, good mother,
To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.
Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honor?
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
What, I am dubbed! I have it on my shoulder.
But, mother, I am not Sir Robert's son,
I have disclaimed Sir Robert and my land,
Legitimation, name, and all is gone;
Then, good my mother, let me know my father;
Some proper man, I hope. Who was it, mother?
Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?
As faithfully as I deny the devil.
King Richard Cordelion was thy father.
By long and vehement suit I was seduced 
To make room for him in my husband's bed.
Heaven! lay not my transgression to my charge, 
That art the issue of my dear offense, 
Which was so strongly urged past my defense.
Now by this light, were I to get again,
Madam, I would not wish a better father.
Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
And so doth yours: your fault was not your folly;
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
Against whose fury and unmatched force
The aweless lion could not wage the fight,
Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand.
He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother,
With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.
Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin,
And they shall say, when Richard me begot,
If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin.
Who says it was, he lies, I say 'twas not. 
Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.
Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
Richard, that robbed the lion of his heart,
And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
By this brave duke came early to his grave;
And for amends to his posterity,
At our importance hither is he come
To spread his colors, boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke the usurpation
Of thy unnatural uncle, English John.
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
God shall forgive you Cordelion's death
The rather that you give his offspring life,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war.
I give you welcome with a powerless hand,
But with a heart full of unstained love.
Welcome before the gates of Angiers, Duke.
A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss 
As seal to this indenture of my love: 
That to my home I will no more return
Till Angiers, and the right thou hast in France,
Together with that pale, that white-faced shore,
Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides
And coops from other lands her islanders,
Even till that England, hedged in with the main,
That water-walled bulwark, still secure
And confident from foreign purposes,
Even till that utmost corner of the west
Salute thee for her king; till then, fair boy,
Will I not think of home, but follow arms.
O, take his mother's thanks, a widow's thanks,
Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength
To make a more requital to your love!
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords 
In such a just and charitable war.
Well, then to work! Our cannon shall be bent 
Against the brows of this resisting town.
Call for our chiefest men of discipline 
To cull the plots of best advantages. 
We'll lay before this town our royal bones,
Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood,
But we will make it subject to this boy.
Stay for an answer to your embassy,
Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood.
My Lord Chatillion may from England bring
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood
That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.
A wonder, lady! Lo upon thy wish
Our messenger Chatillion is arrived!
What England says, say briefly, gentle lord,
We coldly pause for thee; Chatillion, speak.
Then turn your forces from this paltry siege,
And stir them up against a mightier task.
England, impatient of your just demands,
Hath put himself in arms. The adverse winds,
Whose leisure I have stayed, have given him time 
To land his legions all as soon as I;
His marches are expedient to this town, 
His forces strong, his soldiers confident. 
With him along is come the mother-queen,
An [Ate,] stirring him to blood and strife;
With her her niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain;
With them a bastard of the king's deceased,
And all th' unsettled humors of the land,
Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens,
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
To make a hazard of new fortunes here.
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er
Did never float upon the swelling tide
To do offense and scathe in Christendom.
The interruption of their churlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance. They are at hand,
To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.
How much unlooked for is this expedition!
By how much unexpected, by so much 
We must awake endeavor for defense,
For courage mounteth with occasion. 
Let them be welcome then, we are prepared. 
Peace be to France -- if France in peace permit
Our just and lineal entrance to our own;
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct
Their proud contempt that beats his peace to heaven.
Peace be to England, if that war return
From France to England, there to live in peace.
England we love, and for that England's sake
With burden of our armor here we sweat.
This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
But thou from loving England art so far
That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king,
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Outfaced infant state, and done a rape
Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
Look here upon thy brother Geffrey's face: 
These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his;
This little abstract doth contain that large 
Which died in Geffrey; and the hand of time 
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,
And this his son; England was Geffrey's right,
And this is Geffrey's in the name of God.
How comes it then that thou are called a king,
When living blood doth in these temples beat,
Which owe the crown that thou; o'ermasterest?
From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
To draw my answer from thy articles?
From that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts
In any [breast] of strong authority,
To look into the blots and stains of right.
That judge hath made me guardian to this boy,
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong,
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
Alack, thou dost usurp authority.
Excuse it is to beat usurping down.
Who is it thou dost call usurper, France? 
Let me make answer: thy usurping son.
Out,insolent, thy bastard shall be king 
That thou mayst be a queen, and check the world! 
My bed was ever to thy son as true
As thine was to thy husband, and this boy
Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
Than thou and John in manners, being as like
As rain to water, or devil to his dam.
My boy a bastard? By my soul I think
His father never was so true begot --
It cannot be, and if thou wert his mother.
There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
There's a good grandame, boy, that would blot thee.
Pease!  Hear the crier. What the devil art thou? 
One that will play the devil, sir, with you, 
And 'a may catch your hide and you alone.
You are the hare of whom the proverb goes.
Whose valor plucks dead lions by the beard;
I'll smoke your skin-coat and I catch you right.
Sirrah, look to't, i' faith I will, i' faith,
O, well did he become that lion's robe,
That did disrobe the lion of the robe!
It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides' [shows] upon an ass.
But, ass, I'll take that burthen from your back,
Or lay on that shall make your shoulder crack.
What cracker is this same that deafs our ears
With this abundance of superfluous breath?
King [Philip], determine what we shall do straight.
Women and fools, break off your conference. 
King John, this is the very sum of all:
England and Ireland, [Anjou], Touraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee.
Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms? 
My life as soon. I do defy thee, France.
Arthur of Britain, yield thee to my hand, 
And out of my dear love I'll give thee more 
Than e'er the coward hand of France can win.
Submit thee, boy. Come to thy grandame, child.
Do, child, go to it grandame, child,
Give grandame kingdom, and it grandame will
Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig.
There's a good grandame. Good my mother, peace.
I would that I were low laid in my grave,
I am not worth this coil that's made for me.
His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
Now shame upon you, whe'er she does or no!
His grandame's wrongs, and not his mother's shames,
Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,
Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee;
Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
To do him justice, and revenge on you.
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!
Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth, 
Call not me slanderer! Thou and thine usurp
The dominations, royalties, and rights 
Of this oppressed boy. This is thy eldest son's son, 
Infortunate in nothing but in thee.
Thy sins are visited in this poor child,
The canon of the law is laid on him,
Being but the second generation
Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
Bedlam, have done. I have but this to say,
That he is not only plagued for her sin,
But God hath made her sin and her the plague
On this removed issue, plagued for her,
And with her plague, her sin; his injury
Her injury, the beadle to her sin --
All punished in the person of this child,
And all for her. A plague upon her!
Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
A will that bars the title of thy son.
Ay, who doubts that? A will! a wicked will,
A woman's will, a cank'red grandam's will!
Peace, lady, pause, or be more temperate.
It ill beseems this presence to cry aim 
To these ill-tuned repetitions.
Some trumpet summon hither to the walls 
These men of Angiers; let us hear them speak 
Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.
Who is it that hath warned us to the walls?
'Tis France, for England. England for itself.
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects --
You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects,
Our trumpet called you to this gentle parle --
For our advantage -- therefore hear us first:
These flags of France, that are advanced here
Before the eye and prospect of your town,
Have hither marched to your endamagement.
The cannons have their bowels full of wrath,
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls;
All preparation for a bloody siege 
And merciless proceeding by these French
[Confronts your] city's eyes, your winking gates; 
And but for our approach those sleeping stones, 
That as a waist doth girdle you about,
By the compulsion of their ordinance
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made
For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
But on the sight of us, your lawful King,
Who painfully with much expedient march
Have brought a countercheck before your gates,
To save unscratched your city's threat'ned cheeks,
Behold, the French amazed vouchsafe a parle,
And now instead of bullets wrapped in fire,
To make a shaking fever in your walls,
They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke,
To make a faithless error in your ears;
Which trust accordingly, kind citizens,
And let us in -- your King, whose labored spirits,
Forewearied in this action of swift speed,
Craves harborage within your city walls.
When I have said, make answer to us both.
Lo in this right hand, whose protection 
Is most divinely vowed upon the right
Of him it holds, stands young Plantagenet, 
Son to the elder brother of this man, 
And king o'er him and all that he enjoys.
For this down-trodden equity, we tread
In warlike march these greens before your town,
Being no further enemy to you
Than the constraint of hospitable zeal
In the relief of this oppressed child
Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
To pay that duty which you truly owe
To him that owes it, namely this young prince,
And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear,
Save in aspect, hath all offense sealed up;
Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent
Against th' [invulnerable] clouds of heaven,
And with a blessed and unvexed retire,
With unhacked swords, and helmets all unbruised,
We will bear home that lusty blood again
Which here we came to spout against your town,
And leave your children, wives, and you in peace.
But if you fondly pass our proffered offer,
'Tis not the rounder of your old-faced walls 
Can hide you from our messengers of war,
Though all these English and their discipline 
Were harbored in their rude circumference. 
Then tell us, shall your city call us lord,
In that behalf which we have challenged it?
Or shall we give the signal to our rage,
And stalk in blood to our possession?
In brief, we are the King of England's subjects:
For him, and in his right, we hold this town.
Acknowledge then the King, and let me in.
That can we not; but he that proves the King, 
To him will we prove loyal. Till that time
Have we rammed up our gates against the world.
Doth not the crown of England prove the King?
And if not that, I bring you witnesses,
Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed --
To verify our title with their lives.
As many and as well-born bloods as those --
Stand in his face to contradict his claim. 
Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
Then God forgive the sin of all those souls
That to their everlasting residence,
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet
In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king!
Amen, amen! Mount, chevaliers! To arms!
Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e'er since
Sits on's horseback at mine hostess' door,
Teach us some fence! Sirrah, were I at home, 
At your den, sirrah, with your lioness,
I would set an ox-head to your lion's hide,
And make a monster of you. Peace, no more.
O, tremble! for you hear the lion roar.
Up higher to the plain, where we'll set forth 
In best appointment all our regiments.
Speed then to take advantage of the field. 
It shall be so, and at the other hill 
Command the rest to stand. God and our right!
You men of Angiers, open wide your gates, 
And let young Arthur Duke of Britain in,
Who by the hand of France this day hath made
Much work for tears in many an English mother,
Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground.
Many a widow's husband grovelling lies,
Coldly embracing the discolored earth,
And victory with little loss doth play
Upon the dancing banners of the French,
Who are at hand, triumphantly displayed,
To enter conquerors, and to proclaim
Arthur of Britain England's King and yours.
Rejoice, you men of Angiers, ring your bells, 
King John, your King and England's, doth approach, 
Commander of this hot malicious day.
Their armors, that marched hence so silver-bright,
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood.
There stuck no plume in any English crest
That is removed by a staff of France;
Our colors do return in those same hands
That did display them when we first marched forth;
And like a jolly troop of huntsmen come
Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes.
Open your gates and give the victors way.
Heralds, from off our tow'rs we might behold, 
From first to last, the onset and retire
Of both your armies, whose equality
By our best eyes cannot be censured.
Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answered blows;
Strength matched with strength, and power confronted power: 
Both are alike, and both alike we like.
One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even, 
We hold our town for neither; yet for both. 
France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
Say, shall the current of our right roam on?
Whose passage, vexed with thy impediment,
Shall leave his native channel and o'erswell
With course disturbed even thy confining shores,
Unless thou let his silver water keep
A peaceful progress to the ocean. 
England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood 
In this hot trial more than we of France, 
Rather lost more. And by this hand I swear,
That sways the earth this climate overlooks,
Before we will lay down our just-borne arms
We'll put thee down,'gainst whom these arms we bear,
Or add a royal number to the dead,
Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
Ha, majesty! how high thy glory tow'rs
When the rich blood of kings is set on fire!
O now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel,
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs,
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men,
In undetermined differences of kings.
Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus?
Cry "havoc," kings! back to the stained field,
You equal potents, fiery kindled spirits!
Then let confusion of one part confirm
The other's peace. Till then, blows, blood, and death!
Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
Speak, citizens, for England. Who's your king?
The King of England, when we know the King. 
Know him in us, that here hold up his right.
In us, that are our own great deputy,
And bear possession of our person here,
Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.
A greater pow'r than we denies all this,
And till it be undoubted, we do lock
Our former scruple in our strong-barred gates,
Kings of our fear, until our fears, resolved,
Be by some certain king purged and deposed.
By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings,
And stand securely on their battlements
As in a theatre, whence they gape and point
At your industrious scenes and acts of death.
Your royal presences be ruled by me:
Do like the mutines of Jerusalem,
Be friends awhile, and both conjointly bend
Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town.
By east and west let France and England mount
Their battering cannon charged to the mouths, 
Till their soul-fearing clamors have brawled down
The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city. 
I'd play incessantly upon these jades, 
Even till unfenced desolation
Leave them as naked as the vulgar air.
That done, dissever your united strengths,
And part your mingled colors once again,
Turn face to face and bloody point to point;
Then, in a moment, Fortune shall cull forth
Out of one side her happy minion,
To whom in favor she shall give the day,
And kiss him with a glorious victory.
How like you this wild counsel, mighty states?
Smacks it not something of the policy?
Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads,
I like it well. France, shall we knit our pow'rs,
And lay this Angiers even with the ground,
Then after fight who shall be king of it?
And if thou hast the mettle of a king,
Being wronged as we are by this peevish town,
Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery,
As we will ours, against these saucy walls, 
And when that we have dashed them to the ground,
Why then defy each other, and pell-mell 
Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell. 
Let it be so. Say, where will you assault?
We from the west will send destruction
I from the north. Our thunder from the south
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.
O prudent discipline! From north to south --
Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth.
I'll stir them to it. -- Come, away, away!
Hear us, great kings! Vouchsafe awhile to stay,
And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league;
Win you this city without stroke or wound,
Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds,
That here come sacrifices for the field.
Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings.
Speak on with favor, we are bent to hear.
That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch, 
Is near to England. Look upon the years
Of Lewis the Dolphin and that lovely maid. 
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty, 
Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch?
If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
Where should he find it purer than in Blanch?
If love ambitious sought a match of birth,
Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch?
Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
Is the young Dolphin every way complete:
If not complete of, say he is not she,
And she again wants nothing, to name want,
If want it be not that she is not he.
He is the half part of a blessed man,
Left to be finished by such as she,
And she a fair divided excellence,
Whose fullness of perfection lies in him.
O, two such silver currents when they join
Do glorify the banks that bound them in;
And two such shores to two such streams made one,
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
To these two princes, if you marry them.
This union shall do more than battery can 
To our fast-closed gates; for at this match,
With swifter spleen than powder can enforce, 
The mouth of passage shall we fling wide open, 
And give you entrance; but without this match,
The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
Lions more confident, mountains and rocks
More free from motion, no, not Death himself
In mortal fury half so peremptory,
As we to keep this city. Here's a stay
That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth indeed,
That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas,
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions
As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!
What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?
He speaks plain cannon-fire, and smoke, and bounce,
He gives the bastinado with his tongue;
Our ears are cudgelled -- not a word of his
But buffets better than a fist of France.
'Zounds, I was never so bethumped with words
Since I first called my brother's father dad.
Son, list to this conjunction, make this match, 
Give with our niece a dowry large enough,
For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie 
Thy now unsured assurance to the crown, 
That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe
The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit.
I see a yielding in the looks of France;
Mark how they whisper. Urge them while their souls
Are capable of this ambition,
Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath
Of soft petitions, pity, and remorse,
Cool and congeal again to what it was.
Why answer not the double majesties
This friendly treaty of our threat'ned town?
Speak England first, that hath been forward first
To speak unto this city: what say you?
If that the Dolphin there, thy princely son,
Can in this book of beauty read, "I love,"
Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen;
For [Anjou] and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers,
And all that we upon this side the sea
(Except this city now by us besieged) 
Find liable to our crown and dignity,
Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich 
In titles, honors, and promotions, 
As she in beauty, education, blood,
Holds hand with any princess of the world.
What say'st thou, boy? Look in the lady's face. 
I do, my lord, and in her eye I find
A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
The shadow of myself formed in her eye,
Which being but the shadow of your son,
Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow.
I do protest I never loved myself
Till now infixed I beheld myself
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye!
Hanged in the frowning wrinkle of her brow!
And quartered in her heart! he doth espy
Himself love's traitor. This is pity now,
That hanged and drawn and quartered there should be
In such a love so vile a lout as he. 
My uncle's will in this respect is mine.
If he see aught in you that makes him like, 
That any thing he sees, which moves his liking, 
I can with ease translate it to my will;
Or if you will, to speak more properly,
I will enforce it eas'ly to my love.
Further I will not flatter you, my lord,
That all I see in you is worthy love,
Than this: that nothing do I see in you,
Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge,
That I can find should merit any hate.
What say these young ones? What say you, my niece?
That she is bound in honor still to do
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
Speak then, Prince Dolphin, can you love this lady?
Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love,
For I do love her most unfeignedly.
Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine,
Poictiers, and Anjou, these five provinces, 
With her to thee, and this addition more,
Full thirty thousand marks of English coin. 
Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal, 
Command thy son and daughter to join hands.
It likes us well, young princes; close your hands.
And your lips too, for I am well assured
That I did so when I was first assured.
Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates,
Let in that amity which you have made,
For at Saint Mary's Chapel presently
The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop?
I know she is not, for this match made up
Her presence would have interrupted much.
Where is she and her son? tell me, who knows.
She is sad and passionate at your Highness' tent.
And by my faith, this league that we have made 
Will give her sadness very little cure.
Brother of England, how may we content
This widow lady? In her right we came, 
Which we, God knows, have turned another way,
To our own vantage.  We will heal up all, 
For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Britain
And Earl of Richmond, and this rich fair town
We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance;
Some speedy messenger bid her repair
To our solemnity. I trust we shall,
If not fill up the measure of her will,
Yet in some measure satisfy her so
That we shall stop her exclamation.
Go we, as well as haste will suffer us,
To this unlooked-for, unprepared pomp.
Mad world, mad kings, mad composition!
John, to stop Arthur's title in the whole, 
Hath willingly departed with a part, 
And France, whose armor conscience buckled on,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field
As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear
With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
That broker that still breaks the pate of faith,
That daily break-vow, he that wins of all,
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
Who having no external thing to lose
But the word"maid," cheats the poor maid of that,
That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling commodity,
Commodity, the bias of the world --
The world, who of itself is peized well,
Made to run even upon even ground,
Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias,
This sway of motion, this commodity,
Makes it take head from all indifferency,
From all direction, purpose, course, intent --
And this same bias, this commodity,
This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word,
Clapped on the outward eye of fickle France, 
Hath drawn him from his own determined aid,
From a resolved and honorable war 
To a most base and vile-concluded peace. 
And why rail I on this commodity?
But for because he hath not wooed me yet:
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand
When his fair angels would salute my palm,
But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich.
Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail,
And say there is no sin but to be rich;
And being rich, my virtue then shall be
To say there is no vice but beggary.
Since kings break faith upon commodity,
Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee. 
Gone to be married? Gone to swear a peace?
False blood to false blood joined! Gone to be friends? 
Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those provinces?
It is not so, thou hast misspoke, misheard; 
Be well advised, tell o'er thy tale again. 
It cannot be, thou dost but say 'tis so.
I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
Is but the vain breath of a common man.
Believe me, I do not believe thee, man,
I have a king's oath to the contrary.
Thou shalt be punished for thus frighting me,
For I am sick and capable of fears,
Oppressed with wrongs, and therefore full of fears,
A widow, husbandless, subject to fears,
A woman, naturally born to fears;
And though thou now confess thou didst but jest,
With my vexed spirits I cannot take a truce,
But they will quake and tremble all this day.
What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds?
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
Then speak again, not all thy former tale, 
But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
As true as I believe you think them false 
That give you cause to prove my saying true. 
O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die,
And let belief and life encounter so
As doth the fury of two desperate men,
Which in the very meeting fall, and die.
Lewis marry Blanch? O boy, then where art thou?
France friend with England, what becomes of me?
Fellow, be gone! I cannot brook thy sight,
This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
What other harm have I, good lady, done,
But spoke the harm that is by others done?
Which harm within itself so heinous is
As it makes harmful all that speak of it.
I do beseech you, madam, be content.
If thou that bid'st me be content wert grim,
Ugly, and sland'rous to thy mother's womb,
Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains,
Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious,
Patched with foul moles and eye-offending marks,
I would not care, I then would be content, 
For then I should not love thee; no, nor thou
Become thy great birth nor deserve a crown. 
But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy, 
Nature and Fortune joined to make thee great.
Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast,
And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O,
She is corrupted, changed, and won from thee;
Sh' adulterates hourly with thine uncle John,
And with her golden hand hath plucked on France
To tread down fair respect of sovereignty,
And made his majesty the bawd to theirs.
France is a bawd to Fortune and King John,
That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John!
Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
Envenom him with words, or get thee gone,
And leave those woes alone, which I alone
Am bound to underbear. Pardon me, madam,
I may not go without you to the kings.
Thou mayst, thou shalt, I will not go with thee.
I will instruct my sorrows to be proud,
For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop. 
To me and to the state of my great grief
Let kings assemble; for my grief's so great 
That no supporter but the huge firm earth 
Can hold it up. Here
I and sorrows sit;
Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.
'Tis true, fair daughter, and this blessed
day 
Ever in France shall be kept festival.
To solemnize this day the glorious sun
Stays in his course and plays the alchymist,
Turning with splendor of his precious eye
The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold.
The yearly course that brings this day about
Shall never see it but a holy day.
A wicked day, and not a holy day!
What hath this day deserved? what hath it done,
That it in golden letters should be set 
Among the high tides in the calendar?
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week, 
This day of shame, oppression, perjury. 
Or if it must stand still, let wives with child
Pray that their burthens may not fall this day,
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be crossed;
But on this day let seamen fear no wrack;
No bargains break that are not this day made:
This day all things begun come to ill end,
Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!
By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause
To curse the fair proceedings of this day.
Have I not pawned to you my majesty?
You have beguiled me with a counterfeit
Resembling majesty, which being touched and tried,
Proves valueless. You are forsworn, forsworn!
You came in arms to spill mine enemies' blood,
But now in arms you strengthen it with yours.
The grappling vigor and rough frown of war
Is cold in amity and painted peace,
And our oppression hath made up this league.
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured kings!
A widow cries; be husband to me, heavens! 
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
Wear out the [day] in peace; but ere sunset, 
Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured kings! 
Hear me, O hear me!
Lady Constance, peace!
War, war, no peace! Peace is to me a war.
O Lymoges, O Austria! thou dost shame
That bloody spoil. Thou slave, thou wretch, thou
coward! 
Thou little valiant, great in villainy!
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side!
Thou Fortune's champion that dost never fight
But when her humorous ladyship is by
To teach thee safety! thou art perjured too,
And sooth'st up greatness. What a fool art thou,
A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear
Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave,
Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side?
Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend
Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength,
And dost thou now fall over to my foes?
Thou wear a lion's hide! Doff it for shame,
And hang a calve's-skin on those recreant limbs. 
O, that a man should speak those words to
me! 
And hang a calve's-skin on those recreant 
limbs.
Thou dar'st not say so, villain, for thy life.
And hang a calve's-skin on those recreant
limbs.
We like not this, thou dost forget thyself.
Here comes the holy legate of the Pope.
Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven!
To thee, King John, my holy errand is:
I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal,
And from Pope Innocent the legate here,
Do in his name religiously demand
Why thou against the Church, our holy mother,
So willfully dost spurn; and force perforce
Keep Stephen Langton, chosen Archbishop
Of Canterbury, from that holy see?
This, in our foresaid Holy Father's name,
Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee.
What earthy name to interrogatories 
Can taste the free breath of a sacred king?
Thou canst not, Cardinal, devise a name 
So slight, unworthy, and ridiculous, 
To charge me to an answer, as the Pope.
Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England
Add thus much more, that no Italian priest
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions;
But as we, under [God], are supreme head,
So under Him that great supremacy,
Where we do reign, we will alone uphold
Without th' assistance of a mortal hand.
So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
To him and his usurped authority.
Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.
Though you and all the kings of Christendom
Are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
Dreading the curse that money may buy out,
And by the merit of vild gold, dross, dust,
Purchase corrupted pardon of a man
Who in that sale sells pardon from himself;
Though you, and all the rest so grossly led,
This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish, 
Yet I alone, alone do me oppose
Against the Pope, and count his friends my foes. 
Then, by the lawful power that I have, 
Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate,
And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
From his allegiance to an heretic,
And meritorious shall that hand be called,
Canonized and worshipped as a saint,
That takes away by any secret course
Thy hateful life. O, lawful let it be
That I have room with Rome to curse a while!
Good father Cardinal, cry thou amen
To my keen curses; for without my wrong
There is no tongue hath power to curse him right. 
There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse.
And for mine too: when law can do no right, 
Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong; 
Law cannot give my child his kingdom here,
For he that holds his kingdom holds the law,;
Therefore since law itself is perfect wrong,
How can the law forbid my tongue to curse?
Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
Let go the hand of that arch-heretic,
And raise the power of France upon his head,
Unless he do submit himself to Rome.
Look'st thou pale, France? Do not let go thy hand. 
Look to that, devil, lest that France repent,
And by disjoining hands hell lose a soul.
King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.
And hang a calve's-skin on his recreant limbs.
Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs,
Because -- Your breeches best may carry them.
Philip, what say'st thou to the Cardinal?
What should he say, but as the Cardinal?
Bethink you, father, for the difference 
Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
Or the light loss of England for a friend 
Forgo the easier. That's the curse of Rome.
O Lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts thee here
In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.
The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith, 
But from her need.  O, if thou grant my need,
Which only lives but by the death of faith,
That need must needs infer this principle,
That faith would live again by death of need.
O then tread down my need, and faith mounts up;
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down!
The King is moved, and answers not to this.
O, be removed from him, and answer well!
Do so, King Philip, hang no more in doubt.
Hang nothing but a calve's-skin, most sweet lout. 
I am perplexed, and know not what to say. 
What canst thou say but will perplex thee more, 
If thou stand excommunicate and cursed? 
Good reverend father, make my person yours,
And tell me how you would bestow yourself.
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
And the conjunction of our inward souls
Married in league, coupled, and linked together
With all religious strength of sacred vows.
The latest breath that gave the sound of words
Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves,
And even before this truce, but new before,
No longer than we well could wash our hands
To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
Heaven knows they were besmeared and over-stained
With slaughter's pencil -- where revenge did paint
The fearful difference of incensed kings --
And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood,
So newly joined in love, so strong in both,
Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet?
Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven? 
Make such unconstant children of ourselves,
As now again to snatch our palm from palm, 
Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed 
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
And make a riot on the gentle brow
Of true sincerity? O holy sir,
My reverend father, let it not be so!
Out of your grace devise, ordain, impose
Some gentle order, and then we shall be blest
To do your pleasure and continue friends.
All form is formless, order orderless,
Save what is opposite to England's love.
Therefore to arms! be champion of our Church,
Or let the Church, our mother, breathe her curse,
A mother's curse, on her revolting son.
France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue,
A cased lion by the mortal paw,
A fasting tiger safer by the tooth,
Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith.
So mak'st thou faith an enemy to faith,
And like a civil war set'st oath to oath,
Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow 
First made to heaven, first be to heaven performed,
That is, to be the champion of our Church! 
What since thou swor'st is sworn against thyself, 
And may not be performed by thyself,
For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss
Is not amiss when it is truly done;
And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
The truth is then most done not doing it.
The better act of purposes mistook
Is to mistake again; though indirect,
Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire
Within the scorched veins of one new burned.
It is religion that doth make vows kept,
But thou hast sworn against religion,
By what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st,
And mak'st an oath the surety for thy truth
Against an oath; the truth thou art unsure
To swear, swears only not to be forsworn,
Else what a mockery should it be to swear!
But thou dost swear only to be forsworn,
And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear;
Therefore thy later vows, against thy first, 
Is in thyself rebellion to thyself;
And better conquest never canst thou make 
Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts 
Against these giddy loose suggestions;
Upon which better part our pray'rs come in,
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
The peril of our curses light on thee
So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off,
But in despair die under their black weight.
Rebellion, flat rebellion! Will't not be?
Will not a calve's-skin stop that mouth of thine?
Father, to arms! Upon thy wedding-day?
Against the blood that thou hast married?
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men?
Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums,
Clamors of hell, be measures to our pomp?
O husband, hear me! ay, alack, how new
Is "husband" in my mouth! even for that name,
Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce,
Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms
Against mine uncle.  O, upon my knee,
Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee, 
Thou virtuous Dolphin, alter not the doom 
Now shall I see thy love. What motive may
Be stronger with thee than the name of wife?
That which upholdeth him that thee upholds, 
His honor. O, thine honor, Lewis, thine honor!
I muse your Majesty doth seem so cold,
When such profound respects do pull you on.
I will denounce a curse upon his head.
Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from thee. 
O fair return of banished majesty!
O foul revolt of French inconstancy!
France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.
Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time!
Is it as he will? Well then, France shall rue.
The sun's o'ercast with blood; fair day, adieu!
Which is the side that I must go withal? 
I am with both, each army hath a hand, 
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
They whirl asunder and dismember me.
Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win;
Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose;
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine;
Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive:
Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose;
Assured loss before the match be played.
Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.
There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.
Cousin, go draw our puissance together.
France, I am burned up with inflaming wrath,
A rage whose heat hath this condition,
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
The blood and dearest-valued blood of France.
Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn
To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire. 
Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.
No more than he that threats. To arms let's hie! 
Now by my life, this day grows wondrous hot;
Some aery devil hovers in the sky
And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there,
My mother is assailed in our tent,
And ta'en, I fear. My lord, I rescued her;
Her Highness is in safety, fear you not.
But on, my liege, for very little pains
Will bring this labor to an happy end. 
So shall it be; your Grace shall stay behind
So strongly guarded. Cousin, look not sad,
Thy grandame loves thee, and thy uncle will
As dear be to thee as thy father was.
O, this will make my mother die with grief!
Cousin, away for England! haste before,
And ere our coming see thou shake the bags
Of hoarding abbots, imprisoned angels
Set at liberty. The fat ribs of peace
Must by the hungry now be fed upon.
Use our commission in his utmost force.
Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back,
When gold and silver becks me to come on.
I leave your Highness. Grandame, I will pray
(If ever I remember to be holy)
For your fair safety; so I kiss your hand.
Come hither, little kinsman, hark, a word.
Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
We owe thee much! Within this wall of flesh
There is a soul counts thee her creditor,
And with advantage means to pay thy love;
And, my good friend, thy voluntary oath
Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say,
But I will fit it with some better [time].
By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed
To say what good respect I have of thee.
I am much bounden to your Majesty.
Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet, 
But thou shalt have; and creep time ne'er so slow,
Yet it shall come for me to do thee good. 
I had a thing to say, but let it go. 
The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleasures of the world,
Is all too wanton and too full of gawds
To give me audience. If the midnight bell
Did with his iron tongue and brazen mouth
Sound on into the drowsy race of night;
If this same were a churchyard where we stand,
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs;
Or if that surly spirit, melancholy,
Had baked thy blood and made it heavy, thick,
Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes
And strain their cheeks to idle merriment --
A passion hateful to my purposes;
Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes,
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply
Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words --
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts. 
But, ah, I will not! yet I love thee well,
And by my troth I think thou lov'st me well. 
So well, that what you bid me undertake, 
Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
By heaven, I would do it.
Do not I know thou wouldst?
Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye
On yon young boy. I'll tell thee what, my friend,
He is a very serpent in my way,
And wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread,
He lies before me. Dost thou understand me?
Thou art his keeper. And I'll keep him so,
That he shall not offend your Majesty.
Death. My lord? A grave. He shall not live.
I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee.
Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee.
Remember. Madam, fare you well,
I'll send those powers o'er to your Majesty. 
My blessing go with thee! For England, cousin, go. 
Hubert shall be your man, attend on you 
With all true duty. On toward Callice, ho! 
So by a roaring tempest on the flood,
A whole armado of convicted sail
Is scattered and disjoined from fellowship.
Courage and comfort! all shall yet go well.
What can go well, when we have run so ill? 
Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
Arthur ta'en prisoner? Divers dear friends slain?
And bloody England into England gone,
O'erbearing interruption, spite of France?
What he hath won, that hath he fortified.
So hot a speed with such advice disposed,
Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
Doth want example. Who hath read or heard 
Of any kindred action like to this?
Well could I bear that England had this praise, 
So we could find some pattern of our shame.
Look who comes here! a grave unto a soul,
Holding th' eternal spirit, against her will,
In the vild prison of afflicted breath.
I prithee, lady, go away with me.
Lo! now! now see the issue of your peace.
Patience, good lady, comfort, gentle Constance!
No, I defy all counsel, all redress,
But that which ends all counsel, true redress:
Death, death. O amiable lovely death!
Thou odoriferous stench! sound rottenness!
Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
And I will kiss thy detestable bones,
And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows,
And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust, 
And be a carrion monster like thyself.
Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smil'st, 
And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love, 
O, come to me! O fair affliction, peace!
No, no, I will not, having breath to cry.
O that my tongue were in the thunder's mouth!
Then with a passion would I shake the world,
And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy
Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice,
Which scorns a modern invocation.
Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.
Thou art [not] holy to belie me so,
I am not mad. This hair I tear is mine,
My name is Constance, I was Geffrey's wife,
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost.
I am not mad, I would to heaven I were!
For then 'tis like I should forget myself.
O, if I could, what grief should I forget!
Preach some philosophy to make me mad,
And thou shalt be canonized, Cardinal;
For, being not mad, but sensible of grief,
My reasonable part produces reason 
How I may be delivered of these woes,
And teaches me to kill or hang myself. 
If I were mad, I should forget my son, 
Or madly think a babe of clouts were he.
I am not mad; too well, too well I feel
The different plague of each calamity.
Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note
In the fair multitude of those her hairs!
Where but by chance a silver drop hath fall'n,
Even to that drop ten thousand wiry [friends]
Do glue themselves in sociable grief,
Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
Sticking together in calamity.
To England, if you will. Bind up your hairs.
Yes, that I will; and wherefore will I do it?
I tore them from their bonds, and cried aloud,
"O that these hands could so redeem my son
As they have given these hairs their liberty!"
But~now I envy at their liberty,
And will again commit them to their bonds,
Because my poor child is a prisoner.
And, father Cardinal, I have heard you say 
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven.
If that be true, I shall see my boy again; 
For since the birth of Cain, the first male child, 
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature born.
But now will canker-sorrow eat my bud,
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a ghost,
As dim and meagre as an ague's fit,
And so he'll die; and rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
I shall not know him: therefore never, never
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.
You hold too heinous a respect of grief.
He talks to me that never had a son.
You are as fond of grief as of your child.
Grief fills the room up of my absent child,
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembers me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
Fare you well! Had you such a loss as I, 
I could give better comfort than you do.
I will not keep this form upon my head 
When there is such disorder in my wit.
O Lord, my boy, my Arthur, my fair son!
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!
My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure! 
I fear some outrage, and I'll follow her.
There's nothing in this world can make me joy:
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale
Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
And bitter shame hath spoiled the sweet word's taste,
That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
Before the curing of a strong disease,
Even in the instant of repair and health,
The fit is strongest; evils that take leave,
On their departure most of all show evil.
What have you lost by losing of this day?
All days of glory, joy, and happiness.
If you had won it, certainly you had.
No, no; when Fortune means to men most good, 
She looks upon them with a threat'ning eye.
'Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost 
In this which he accounts so clearly won. 
Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?
As heartily as he is glad he hath him.
Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit;
For even the breath of what I mean to speak
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub,
Out of the path which shall directly lead
Thy foot to England's throne. And therefore mark:
John hath seized Arthur, and it cannot be
That whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins,
The misplaced John should entertain an hour,
One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.
A sceptre snatched with an unruly hand
Must be as boisterously maintained as gained;
And he that stands upon a slipp'ry place
Makes nice of no vild hold to stay him up.
That John may stand, then Arthur needs must fall:
So be it, for it cannot be but so.
But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall?
You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife, 
May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did. 
How green you are and fresh in this old world! 
John lays you plots; the times conspire with you,
For he that steeps his safety in true blood
Shall find but bloody safety, and untrue.
This act so evilly borne shall cool the hearts
Of all his people, and freeze up their zeal,
That none so small advantage shall step forth
To check his reign, but they will cherish it;
No natural exhalation in the sky,
No scope of nature, no distempered day,
No common wind, no customed event,
But they will pluck away his natural cause
And call them meteors, prodigies, and signs,
Abortives, presages, and tongues of heaven,
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John.
May be he will not touch young Arthur's life,
But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
O sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
Even at that news he dies; and then the hearts 
Of all his people shall revolt from him,
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change, 
And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath 
Out of the bloody fingers' ends of John.
Methinks I see this hurly all on foot;
And O, what better matter breeds for you
Than I have named! The bastard Faulconbridge
Is now in England ransacking the Church,
Offending charity. If but a dozen French
Were there in arms, they would be as a call
To train ten thousand English to their side,
Or as a little snow, tumbled about, 
Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dolphin,
Go with me to the King. 'Tis wonderful 
What may be wrought out of their discontent, 
Now that their souls are topful of offense.
For England go; I will whet on the King.
Strong reasons makes strange actions.  Let us go;
If you say ay, the King will not say no. 
Heat me these irons hot, and look thou stand
Within the arras. When I strike my foot
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
And bind the boy which you shall find with me
Fast to the chair. Be heedful. Hence, and watch.
I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.
Uncleanly scruples! fear not you. Look to't.
Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.
Good morrow, Hubert. Good morrow, little prince. 
As little prince, having so great a title 
To be more prince, as may be. You are sad.
Indeed I have been merrier. Mercy on me!
Methinks nobody should be sad but I.
Yet I remember, when I was in France,
Young gentlemen would be as sad as night,
Only for wantonness. By my christendom,
So I were out of prison and kept sheep,
I should be as merry as the day is long;
And so I would be here, but that I doubt
My uncle practices more harm to me.
He is afraid of me and I of him.
Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son?
No indeed is't not; and I would to heaven
I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert.
If I talk to him, with his innocent prate 
He will awake my mercy, which lies dead;
Therefore I will be sudden, and dispatch.
Are you sick, Hubert? You look pale today. 
In sooth, I would you were a little sick,
That I might sit all night and watch with you. 
I warrant I love you more than you do me. 
His words do take possession of my bosom. --
Read here, young Arthur. How now, foolish rheum?
Turning dispiteous torture out of door?
I must be brief, lest resolution drop
Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears. --
Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect.
Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes?
Young boy, I must. And will you? And I will.
Have you the heart? When your head did but ache, 
I knit my handkercher about your brows
(The best I had, a princess wrought it me)
And I did never ask it you again;
And with my hand at midnight held your head;
And like the watchful minutes to the hour, 
Still and anon cheered up the heavy time,
Saying, "What lack you?" and "Where lies your grief?" 
Or"What good love may I perform for you?"
Many a poor man's son would have lien still,
And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you;
But you at your sick service had a prince.
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
And call it cunning. Do, and if you will;
If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill,
Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes,
These eyes that never did nor never shall
So much as frown on you? I have sworn to do it;
And with hot irons must I burn them out.
Ah, none but in this iron age would do it!
The iron of itself, though heat red-hot,
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears,
And quench [his] fiery indignation
Even in the matter of mine innocence;
Nay, after that, consume away in rust,
But for containing fire to harm mine eye.
Are you more stubborn-hard than hammered iron? 
And if an angel should have come to me
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes, 
I would not have believed him -- no tongue but Hubert's. 
O, save me, Hubert, save me! My eyes are out
Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.
Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
Alas, what need you be so boist'rous-rough?
I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still.
For heaven sake, Hubert, let me not be bound!
Nay, hear me, Hubert, drive these men away,
And I will sit as quiet as a lamb;
I will not stir, nor winch, nor speak a word,
Nor look upon the iron angerly.
Thrust but these men away, and I'll forgive you,
What ever torment you do put me to.
Go stand within; let me alone with him.
I am best pleased to be from such a deed.
Alas, I then have chid away my friend! 
He hath a stern look, but a gentle heart.
Let him come back, that his compassion may 
Give life to yours.  Come, boy, prepare yourself.
Is there no remedy? None, but to lose your eyes.
O heaven! that there were but a mote in yours,
A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
Any annoyance in that precious sense!
Then feeling what small things are boisterous there,
Your vild intent must needs seem horrible.
Is this your promise? Go to, hold your tongue.
Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues
Must needs want pleading fur a pair of eyes.
Let me not hold my tongue, let me not, Hubert;
Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue,
So I may keep mine eyes. O, spare mine eyes,
Though to no use but still to look on you!
Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold,
And would not harm me. I can heat it, boy. 
No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief,
Being create for comfort, to be used 
In undeserved extremes. See else yourself, 
There is no malice in this burning coal;
The breath of heaven hath blown his spirit out,
And strewed repentant ashes on his head.
But with my breath I can revive it, boy.
And if you do, you will but make it blush
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert.
Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes;
And, like a dog that is compelled to fight,
Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on.
All things that you should use to do me wrong
Deny their office; only you do lack
That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends,
Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.
Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye
For all the treasure that thine uncle owes.
Yet am I sworn, and I did purpose, boy,
With this same very iron to burn them out.
O now you look like Hubert! All this while
You were disguised. Peace; no more. Adieu. 
Your uncle must not know but you are dead.
I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports; 
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure 
That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend thee. O heaven! I thank you, Hubert.
Silence, no more. Go closely in with me;
Much danger do I undergo for thee. 
Here once again we sit; once [again] crowned,
And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
This"once again" (but that your Highness pleased)
Was once superfluous. You were crowned before,
And that high royalty was ne'er plucked off;
The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt;
Fresh expectation troubled not the land
With any longed-for change or better state.
Therefore, to be possessed with double pomp, 
To guard a title that was rich before,
To gild refined gold, to paint the lily, 
To throw a perfume on the violet, 
To smooth the ice, or add another hue
Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.
But that your royal pleasure must be done,
This act is as an ancient tale new told,
And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
Being urged at a time unseasonable.
In this the antique and well-noted face
Of plain old form is much disfigured,
And like a shifted wind unto a sail,
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
Startles and frights consideration,
Makes sound opinion sick, and truth suspected,
For putting on so new a fashioned robe.
When workmen strive to do better than well,
They do confound their skill in covetousness,
And oftentimes excusing of a fault
Doth make the fault the worse by th' excuse:
As patches set upon a little breach 
Discredit more in hiding of the fault
Than did the fault before it was so patched. 
To this effect, before you were new crowned, 
We breathed our counsel; but it pleased your Highness
To overbear it, and we are all well pleased,
Since all and every part of what we would
Doth make a stand at what your Highness will.
Some reasons of this double coronation
I have possessed you with, and think them strong;
And more, more strong than lesser is my fear,
I shall indue you with. Mean time but ask
What you would have reformed that is not well,
And well shall you perceive how willingly
I will both hear and grant you your requests.
Then I, as one that am the tongue of these
To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
Both for myself and them -- but, chief of all,
Your safety, for the which myself and them
Bend their best studies -- heartily request
Th' enfranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
To break into this dangerous argument:
If what in rest you have in right you hold, 
Why then your fears, which (as they say) attend
The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up 
Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days 
With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth
The rich advantage of good exercise.
That the time's enemies may not have this
To grace occasions, let it be our suit
That you have bid us ask his liberty,
Which for our goods we do no further ask
Than whereupon our weal, on you depending,
Counts it your weal he have his liberty.
Let it be so; I do commit his youth 
To your direction. Hubert, what news with you?
This is the man should do the bloody deed; 
He showed his warrant to a friend of mine.
The image of a wicked heinous fault
Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his
[Doth] show the mood of a much troubled breast,
And I do fearfully believe 'tis done,
What we so feared he had a charge to do.
The color of the King doth come and go
Between his purpose and his conscience,
Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set:
His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.
And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
The foul corruption of a sweet child's death.
We cannot hold mortality's strong hand.
Good lords, although my will to give is living,
The suit which you demand is gone and dead.
He tells us Arthur is deceased tonight.
Indeed we feared his sickness was past cure.
Indeed we heard how near his death he was
Before the child himself felt he was sick.
This must be answered either here or hence. 
Why do you bend such solemn brows on me? 
Think you I bear the shears of destiny? 
Have I commandement on the pulse of life?
It is apparent foul play, and 'tis shame
That greatness should so grossly offer it.
So thrive it in your game! and so farewell.
Stay yet, Lord Salisbury, I'll go with thee,
And find th' inheritance of this poor child,
His little kingdom of a forced grave.
That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle,
Three foot of it doth hold; bad world the while!
This must not be thus borne. This will break out
To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.
They burn in indignation. I repent.
There is no sure foundation set on blood;
No certain life achieved by others' death.
A fearful eye thou hast. Where is that blood
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
So foul a sky clears not without a storm, 
Pour down thy weather. How goes all in France?
From France to England. Never such a pow'r 
For any foreign preparation
Was levied in the body of a land.
The copy of your speed is learned by them;
For when you should be told they do prepare,
The tidings comes that they are all arrived.
O, where hath our intelligence been drunk?
Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care,
That such an army could be drawn in France,
And she not hear of it? My liege, her ear
Is stopped with dust: the first of April died
Your noble mother; and as I hear, my lord,
The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
Three days before; but this from rumor's tongue
I idly heard -- if true or false I know not.
Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion!
O, make a league with me, till I have pleased
My discontented peers! What? mother dead?
How wildly then walks my estate in France! 
Under whose conduct came those pow'rs of France
That thou for truth giv'st out are landed here? 
Under the Dolphin. Thou hast made me giddy
With these ill tidings. -- Now! what says the world
To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
My head with more ill news, for it is full.
But if you be afeard to hear the worst,
Then let the worst unheard fall on your head.
Bear with me, cousin, for I was amazed
Under the tide; but now I breathe again
Aloft the flood, and can give audience
To any tongue, speak it of what it will.
How I have sped among the clergymen
The sums I have collected shall express.
But as I travelled hither through the land,
I find the people strangely fantasied,
Possessed with rumors, full of idle dreams,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear.
And here's a prophet that I brought with me
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found 
With many hundreds treading on his heels;
To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes, 
That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon, 
Your Highness should deliver up your crown.
Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so?
Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.
Hubert, away with him; imprison him;
And on that day at noon, whereon he says
I shall yield up my crown, let him be hanged.
Deliver him to safety, and return,
For I must use thee.  O my gentle cousin,
Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived?
The French, my lord; men's mouths are full of it.
Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury,
With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire,
And others more, going to seek the grave
Of Arthur, whom they say is killed tonight
On your suggestion. Gentle kinsman, go
And thrust thyself into their companies; 
I have a way to win their loves again.
Bring them before me.  I will seek them out. 
Nay, but make haste; the better foot before. 
O, let me have no subject enemies
When adverse foreigners affright my towns
With dreadful pomp of stout invasion
Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels,
And fly, like thought, from them to me again.
The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman.
Go after him; for he perhaps shall need
Some messenger betwixt me and the peers,
And be thou he. With all my heart, my liege. 
My lord, they say five moons were seen tonight;
Four fixed, and the fift did whirl about 
The other four in wondrous motion.
Five moons?  Old men and beldames in the streets 
Do prophesy upon it dangerously.
Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths,
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
And whisper one another in the ear;
And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
Whilst he that hears makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus,
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news,
Who, with his shears and measure in his hand,
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
Told of a many thousand warlike French
That were embattailed and ranked in Kent.
Another lean unwashed artificer
Cuts off his tale and talks of Arthur's death.
Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears?
Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death? 
Thy hand hath murd'red him. I had a mighty cause
To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him. 
No had, my lord? Why, did you not provoke me?
It is the curse of kings to be attended
By slaves that take their humors for a warrant
To break within the bloody house of life,
And on the winking of authority
To understand a law; to know the meaning
Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns
More upon humor than advised respect.
Here is your hand and seal for what I did.
O, when the last accompt 'twixt heaven and earth 
Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal
Witness against us to damnation!
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds
Make deeds ill done! Hadst not thou been by,
A fellow by the hand of nature marked,
Quoted, and signed to do a deed of shame,
This murther had not come into my mind;
But taking note of thy abhorred aspect,
Finding thee fit for bloody villainy, 
Apt, liable to be employed in danger,
I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death; 
And thou, to be endeared to a king, 
Made it no conscience to destroy a prince.
Hadst thou but shook thy head or made a pause
When I spake darkly what I purposed,
Or turned an eye of doubt upon my face,
As bid me tell my tale in express words,
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,
And those thy fears might have wrought fears in me.
But thou didst understand me by my signs,
And didst in signs again parley with sin,
Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent,
And consequently thy rude hand to act
The deed, which both our tongues held vild to name.
Out of my sight, and never see me more!
My nobles leave me, and my state is braved,
Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign pow'rs;
Nay, in the body of this fleshly land,
This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,
Hostility and civil tumult reigns 
Between my conscience and my cousin's death.
Arm you against your other enemies, 
I'll make a peace between your soul and you. 
Young Arthur is alive. This hand of mine
Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
Within this bosom never ent'red yet
The dreadful motion of a murderous thought,
And you have slandered nature in my form,
Which howsoever rude exteriorly,
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
Than to be butcher of an innocent child.
Doth Arthur live? O, haste thee to the peers, 
Throw this report on their incensed rage,
And make them tame to their obedience!
Forgive the comment that my passion made
Upon thy feature, for my rage was blind,
And foul imaginary eyes of blood
Presented thee more hideous than thou art.
O, answer not! but to my closet bring
The angry lords with all expedient haste.
I conjure thee but slowly; run more fast. 
The wall is high, and yet will I leap down.
Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not!
There's few or none do know me; if they did,
This ship-boy's semblance hath disguised me quite.
I am afraid, and yet I'll venture it.
If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
I'll find a thousand shifts to get away.
As good to die and go, as die and stay. 
O me, my uncle's spirit is in these stones.
Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones!
Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury.
It is our safety, and we must embrace 
This gentle offer of the perilous time. 
Who brought that letter from the Cardinal?
The Count Melune, a noble lord of France,
Whose private with me of the Dolphin's love
Is much more general than these lines import.
tomorrow morning let us meet him then.
Or rather then set forward, for 'twill be
Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.
Once more today well met, distempered lords!
The King by me requests your presence straight.
The King hath dispossessed himself of us.
We will not line his thin bestained cloak
With our pure honors, nor attend the foot
That leaves the print of blood where e'er it walks.
Return, and tell him so. We know the worst.
What e'er you think, good words I think were best.
Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now. 
But there is little reason in your grief;
Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now. 
Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege. 
'Tis true -- to hurt his master, no [man] else.
This is the prison. What is he lies here?
O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty! 
The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
Murther, as hating what himself hath done,
Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.
Or when he doomed this beauty to a grave,
Found it too precious-princely for a grave.
Sir Richard, what think you? [Have you] beheld,
Or have you read, or heard, or could you think?
Or do you almost think, although you see,
That you do see? Could thought, without this object,
Form such another? This is the very top,
The heighth, the crest, or crest unto the crest,
Of murther's arms. This is the bloodiest shame,
The wildest savagery, the vildest stroke,
That ever wall-eyed wrath or staring rage 
Presented to the tears of soft remorse.
All murthers past do stand excused in this; 
And this, so sole and so unmatchable, 
Shall give a holiness, a purity,
To the yet unbegotten sin of times;
And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
It is a damned and a bloody work,
The graceless action of a heavy hand --
If that it be the work of any hand.
If that it be the work of any hand?
We had a kind of light what would ensue.
It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand,
The practice and the purpose of the King;
From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
And breathing to his breathless excellence
The incense of a vow, a holy vow,
Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
Never to be infected with delight,
Nor conversant with ease and idleness,
Till I have set a glory to this hand,
By giving it the worship of revenge. 
Our souls religiously confirm thy words. 
Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you.
Arthur doth live, the King hath sent for you.
O, he is bold, and blushes not at death.
Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone!
I am no villain. Must I rob the law?
Your sword is bright, sir, put it up again.
Not till I sheathe it in a murtherer's skin.
Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say,;
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours.
I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
Nor tempt the danger of my true defense,
Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget
Your worth, your greatness, and nobility.
Out, dunghill! dar'st thou brave a nobleman?
Not for my life; but yet I dare defend
My innocent life against an emperor. 
Thou art a murtherer. Do not prove me so; 
Yet I am none. Whose tongue soe'er speaks false, 
Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies.
Cut him to pieces. Keep the peace, I say.
Stand by, or I shall gall you, Faulconbridge.
Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury.
If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
I'll strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime,
Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron
That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
Second a villain and a murtherer?
Lord Bigot, I am none. Who killed this prince?
'Tis not an hour since I left him well.
I honored him, I loved him, and will weep
My date of life out for his sweet live's loss.
Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
For villainy is not without such rheum,
And he, long traded in it, makes it seem 
Like rivers of remorse and innocency.
Away with me, all you whose souls abhor 
Th' uncleanly savors of a slaughter-house, 
For I am stifled with this smell of sin.
Away toward Bury, to the Dolphin there!
There, tell the King, he may inquire us out.
Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work? 
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach
Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
Art thou damned, Hubert. Do but hear me, sir.
Thou'rt damned as black -- nay, nothing is so black --
Thou art more deep damned than Prince Lucifer.
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child.
Upon my soul -- If thou didst but consent
To this most cruel act, do but despair,
And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread
That ever spider twisted from her womb 
Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be a beam
To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself, 
Put but a little water in a spoon, 
And it shall be as all the ocean,
Enough to stifle such a villain up.
I do suspect thee very grievously.
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
Let hell want pains enough to torture me.
I left him well. Go, bear him in thine arms.
I am amazed, methinks, and lose my way
Among the thorns and dangers of this world.
How easy dost thou take all England up
From forth this morsel of dead royalty!
The life, the right, and truth of all this realm
Is fled to heaven; and England now is left
To tug and scamble, and to part by th' teeth
The unowed interest of proud swelling state.
Now for the bare-picked bone of majesty
Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest,
And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace; 
Now powers from home and discontents at home
Meet in one line; and vast confusion waits, 
As doth a raven on a sick-fall'n beast, 
The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
Now happy he whose cloak and center can
Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child,
And follow me with speed. I'll to the King.
A thousand businesses are brief in hand,
And heaven itself doth frown upon the land. 
Thus have I yielded up into your hand
The circle of my glory.  Take again
From this my hand, as holding of the Pope,
Your sovereign greatness and authority.
Now keep your holy word, go meet the French, 
And from his Holiness use all your power
To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed.
Our discontented counties do revolt; 
Our people quarrel with obedience,
Swearing allegiance and the love of soul 
To stranger blood, to foreign royalty. 
This inundation of mistemp'red humor
Rests by you only to be qualified.
Then pause not; for the present time's so sick,
That present med'cine must be minist'red,
Or overthrow incurable ensues.
It was my breath that blew this tempest up,
Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope;
But since you are a gentle convertite,
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war,
And make fair weather in your blust'ring land.
On this Ascension-day, remember well,
Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
Go I to make the French lay down their arms. 
Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet 
Say that before Ascension-day at noon
My crown I should give off? Even so I have.
I did suppose it should be on constraint,
But (heav'n be thanked!) it is but voluntary.
All Kent hath yielded; nothing there holds out 
But Dover castle. London hath received,
Like a kind host, the Dolphin and his powers.
Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone
To offer service to your enemy;
And wild amazement hurries up and down
The little number of your doubtful friends.
Would not my lords return to me again
After they heard young Arthur was alive?
They found him dead and cast into the streets,
An empty casket, where the jewel of life
By some damned hand was robbed and ta'en away.
That villain Hubert told me he did live.
So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew.
But wherefore do you droop? why look you sad?
Be great in act, as you have been in thought.
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye.
Be stirring as the time, be fire with fire,
Threaten the threat'ner, and outface the brow
Of bragging horror; so shall inferior eyes, 
That borrow their behaviors from the great,
Grow great by your example and put on 
The dauntless spirit of resolution. 
Away, and glister like the god of war
When he intendeth to become the field.
Show boldness and aspiring confidence.
What, shall they seek the lion in his den,
And fright him there? and make him tremble there?
O, let it not be said! Forage, and run
To meet displeasure farther from the doors,
And grapple with him ere he come so nigh.
The legate of the Pope hath been with me,
And I have made a happy peace with him,
And he hath promised to dismiss the powers
Led by the Dolphin. O inglorious league! 
Shall we, upon the footing of our land,
Send fair-play orders and make compremise, 
Insinuation, parley, and base truce 
To arms invasive? Shall a beardless boy,
A cock'red silken wanton, brave our fields,
And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil,
Mocking the air with colors idlely spread,
And find no check? Let us, my liege, to arms.
Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
Or if he do, let it at least be said,
They saw we had a purpose of defense.
Have thou the ordering of this present time.
Away then with good courage! Yet I know
Our party may well meet a prouder foe. 
My Lord Melune, let this be copied out,
And keep it safe for our remembrance.
Return the president to these lords again, 
That having our fair order written down,
Both they and we, perusing o'er these notes, 
May know wherefore we took the sacrament, 
And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.
Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
And, noble Dolphin, albeit we swear
A voluntary zeal and an unurged faith
To your proceedings, yet believe me, Prince,
I am not glad that such a sore of time
Should seek a plaster by contemned revolt,
And heal the inveterate canker of one wound
By making many. O, it grieves my soul,
That I must draw this metal from my side
To be a widow-maker! O and there
Where honorable rescue and defense
Cries out upon the name of Salisbury!
But such is the infection of the time,
That for the health and physic of our right,
We cannot deal but with the very hand
Of stern injustice and confused wrong.
And is't not pity, O my grieved friends,
That we, the sons and children of this isle,
[Were] born to see so sad an hour as this, 
Wherein we step after a stranger, march
Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up 
Her enemies' ranks -- I must withdraw and weep 
Upon the spot of this enforced cause --
To grace the gentry of a land remote,
And follow unacquainted colors here?
What, here? O nation, that thou couldst remove!
That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about,
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself,
And [gripple] thee unto a pagan shore,
Where these two Christian armies might combine
The blood of malice in a vein of league,
And not to spend it so unneighborly!
A noble temper dost thou show in this,
And great affections wrastling in thy bosom
Doth make an earthquake of nobility.
O, what a noble combat hast [thou] fought
Between compulsion and a brave respect!
Let me wipe off this honorable dew,
That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks.
My heart hath melted at a lady's tears,
Being an ordinary inundation;
But this effusion of such manly drops, 
This show'r, blown up by tempest of the soul,
Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed 
Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven 
Figured quite o'er with burning meteors.
Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury,
And with a great heart heave away this storm.
Commend these waters to those baby eyes
That never saw the giant world enraged,
Nor met with fortune other than at feasts,
Full warm of blood, of mirth, of gossiping.
Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
Into the purse of rich prosperity
As Lewis himself; so, nobles, shall you all,
That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
And even there, methinks an angel spake.
Look where the holy legate comes apace,
To give us warrant from the hand of heaven,
And on our actions set the name of right
With holy breath. Hail, noble Prince of France!
The next is this: King John hath reconciled 
Himself to Rome, his spirit is come in,
That so stood out against the holy Church, 
The great metropolis and see of Rome; 
Therefore thy threat'ning colors now wind up,
And tame the savage spirit of wild war,
That like a lion fostered up at hand,
It may lie gently at the foot of peace,
And be no further harmful than in show.
Your Grace shall pardon me, I will not back.
I am too high-born to be propertied,
To be a secondary at control,
Or useful servingman and instrument
To any sovereign state throughout the world.
Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars
Between this chastised kingdom and myself,
And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out
With that same weak wind which enkindled it.
You taught me how to know the face of right,
Acquainted me with interest to this land,
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart,
And come ye now to tell me John hath made
His peace with Rome? What is that peace to me? 
I, by the honor of my marriage-bed,
After young Arthur, claim this land for mine, 
And now it is half conquered, must I back 
Because that John hath made his peace with Rome?
Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne?
What men provided? what munition sent,
To underprop this action? Is't not I
That undergo this charge? Who else but I,
And such as to my claim are liable,
Sweat in this business and maintain this war?
Have I not heard these islanders shout out
" as I have banked their towns?
Have I not here the best cards for the game,
To win this easy match played for a crown?
And shall I now give o'er the yielded set?
No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.
You look but on the outside of this work.
Outside or inside, I will not return
Till my attempt so much be glorified
As to my ample hope was promised
Before I drew this gallant head of war,
And culled these fiery spirits from the world,
To outlook conquest and to win renown 
Even in the jaws of danger and of death.
What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us? 
According to the fair play of the world,
Let me have audience. I am sent to speak:
My holy Lord of Milan, from the King
I come to learn how you have dealt for him;
And, as you answer, I do know the scope
And warrant limited unto my tongue.
The Dolphin is too willful-opposite,
And will not temporize with my entreaties.
He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.
By all the blood that ever fury breathed,
The youth says well. Now hear our English King,
For thus his royalty doth speak in me:
He is prepared, and reason too he should --
This apish and unmannerly approach,
This harnessed masque and unadvised revel,
This [unhaired] sauciness and boyish troops,
The King doth smile at, and is well prepared
To whip this dwarfish war, this pigmy arms, 
From out the circle of his territories.
That hand which had the strength, even at your door, 
To cudgel you and make you take the hatch, 
To dive like buckets in concealed wells,
To crouch in litter of your stable planks,
To lie like pawns locked up in chests and trunks,
To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake
Even at the crying of your nation's crow,
Thinking this voice an armed Englishman;
Shall that victorious hand be feebled here,
That in your chambers gave you chastisement?
No! Know the gallant monarch is in arms,
And like an eagle o'er his aery tow'rs,
To souse annoyance that comes near his nest;
And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts,
You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb
Of your dear mother England, blush for shame;
For your own ladies and pale-visaged maids
Like Amazons come tripping after drums,
Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change,
Their needl's to lances, and their gentle hearts
To fierce and bloody inclination. 
There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace; 
We grant thou canst outscold us. Fare thee well! 
We hold our time too precious to be spent
With such a brabbler. Give me leave to speak.
No, I will speak. We will attend to neither.
Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war
Plead for our interest and our being here.
Indeed your drums, being beaten, will cry out;
And so shall you, being beaten. Do but start
An echo with the clamor of thy drum,
And even at hand a drum is ready braced
That shall reverberate all as loud as thine.
Sound but another, and another shall
(As loud as thine) rattle the welkin's ear,
And mock the deep-mouthed thunder; for at hand
(Not trusting to this halting legate here,
Whom he hath used rather for sport than need)
Is warlike John; and in his forehead sits
A bare-ribbed death, whose office is this day 
To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
Strike up our drums, to find this danger out. 
And thou shalt find it, Dolphin, do not doubt. 
How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.
Badly, I fear. How fares your Majesty?
This fever, that hath troubled me so long,
Lies heavy on me. O, my heart is sick
My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulconbridge, 
Desires your Majesty to leave the field,
And send him word by me which way you go.
Tell him toward Swinstead, to the abbey there.
Be of good comfort; for the great supply,
That was expected by the Dolphin here,
Are wracked three nights ago on Goodwin Sands
This news was brought to Richard but even now.
The French fight coldly, and retire themselves. 
Ay me, this tyrant fever burns me up,
And will not let me welcome this good news. 
Set on toward Swinstead. To my litter straight, 
Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint. 
I did not think the King so stored with friends.
Up once again! Put spirit in the French;
If they miscarry, we miscarry too.
That misbegotten devil Faulconbridge,
In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
They say King John, sore sick, hath left the field.
Lead me to the revolts of England here. 
When we were happy we had other names.
It is the Count Melune. Wounded to death. 
Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold!
Unthread the rude eye of rebellion,
And welcome home again discarded faith.
Seek out King John and full before his feet;
For if the French be lords of this loud day,
He means to recompense the pains you take
By cutting off your heads. Thus hath he sworn,
And I with him, and many more with me,
Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury,
Even on that altar where we swore to you
Dear amity and everlasting love.
May this be possible? May this be true?
Have I not hideous death within my view,
Retaining but a quantity of life,
Which bleeds away even as a form of wax
Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire?
What in the world should make me now deceive,
Since I must lose the use of all deceit?
Why should I then be false, since it is true
That I must die here and live hence by truth? 
I say again, if Lewis do win the day,
He is forsworn if e'er those eyes of yours 
Behold another day break in the east; 
But even this night, whose black contagious breath
Already smokes about the burning crest
Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied sun,
Even this ill night your breathing shall expire,
Paying the fine of rated treachery
Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives,
If Lewis by your assistance win the day.
Commend me to one Hubert with your king;
The love of him, and this respect besides,
For that my grandsire was an Englishman,
Awakes my conscience to confess all this.
In lieu whereof, I pray you bear me hence
From forth the noise and rumor of the field,
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
In peace, and part this body and my soul
With contemplation and devout desires.
We do believe thee, and beshrew my soul
But I do love the favor and the form
Of this most fair occasion, by the which
We will untread the steps of damned flight, 
And like a bated and retired flood,
Leaving our rankness and irregular course, 
Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlooked, 
And calmly run on in obedience
Even to our ocean, to our great King John.
My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence,
For I do see the cruel pangs of death
Right in thine eye. Away, my friends! New flight,
And happy newness, that intends old right.
The sun of heaven, methought, was loath to set,
But stayed and made the western welkin blush,
When English measure backward their own ground
In faint retire. O, bravely came we off,
When with a volley of our needless shot,
After such bloody toil, we bid good night,
And wound our tott'ring colors clearly up,
Last in the field, and almost lords of it! 
Where is my prince, the Dolphin?  Here: what news?
The Count Melune is slain; the English lords
By his persuasion are again fall'n off,
And your supply, which you have wished so long,
Are cast away, and sunk on Goodwin Sands.
Ah, foul shrewd news! Beshrew thy very heart!
I did not think to be so sad tonight
As this hath made me. Who was he that said
King John did fly an hour or two before
The stumbling night did part our weary pow'rs?
Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.
Well; keep good quarter and good care tonight; 
The day shall not be up so soon as I,
To try the fair adventure of tomorrow. 
Who's there? Speak ho! speak quickly, or I shoot. 
A friend. What art thou? Of the part of England.
What's that to thee? Why may not I demand
Of thine affairs, as well as thou of mine?
Hubert, I think. Thou hast a perfect thought.
I will upon all hazards well believe
Thou art my friend that know'st my tongue so well.
Who thou wilt; and if thou please,
Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think
I come one way of the Plantagenets.
Unkind remembrance! thou and endless night
Have done me shame. Brave soldier, pardon me
That any accent breaking from thy tongue
Should scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
Come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?
Why, here walk I in the black brow of night,
To find you out.  Brief then; and what's the news?
O my sweet sir, news fitting to the night, 
Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible. 
Show me the very wound of this ill news;
I am no woman, I'll not swound at it.
The King, I fear, is poisoned by a monk.
I left him almost speechless, and broke out
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
The better arm you to the sudden time
Than if you had at leisure known of this.
How did he take it? Who did taste to him?
A monk, I tell you, a resolved villain,
Whose bowels suddenly burst out. The King
Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.
Who didst thou leave to tend his Majesty?
Why, know you not? the lords are all come back,
And brought Prince Henry in their company,
At whose request the King hath pardoned them,
And they are all about his Majesty.
Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
And tempt us not to bear above our power!
I'll tell thee, Hubert, half my power this night, 
Passing these flats, are taken by the tide --
These Lincoln Washes have devoured them; 
Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped. 
Away before; conduct me to the King;
I doubt he will be dead or ere I come. 
It is too late, the life of all his blood
Is touched corruptibly; and his pure brain
(Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house)
Doth by the idle comments that it makes
Foretell the ending of mortality.
His Highness yet doth speak, and holds belief
That being brought into the open air,
It would allay the burning quality
Of that fell poison which assaileth him.
Let him be brought into the orchard here.
Doth he still rage?  He is more patient 
Than when you left him; even now he sung.
O vanity of sickness! fierce extremes 
In their continuance will not feel themselves. 
Death, having preyed upon the outward parts,
Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
Against the [mind], the which he pricks and wounds
With many legions of strange fantasies,
Which in their throng and press to that last hold,
Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that death should sing. 
I am the [cygnet] to this pale faint swan
Who chaunts a doleful hymn to his own death,
And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings
His soul and body to their lasting rest.
Be of good comfort, Prince, for you are born
To set a form upon that indigest
Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.
Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room,
It would not out at windows nor at doors.
There is so hot a summer in my bosom
I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen
Upon a parchment, and against this fire 
Do I shrink up.  How fares your Majesty?
Poisoned -- ill fare! dead, forsook, cast off,
And none of you will bid the winter come
To thrust his icy fingers in my maw,
Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course
Through my burned bosom, nor entreat the north
To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,
I beg cold comfort; and you are so strait
And so ingrateful, you deny me that.
O that there were some virtue in my tears,
That might relieve you!  The salt in them is hot.
Within me is a hell, and there the poison
Is as a fiend confined to tyrannize
On unreprievable condemned blood.
O, I am scalded with my violent motion
And spleen of speed to see your Majesty! 
O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye.
The tackle of my heart is cracked and burned, 
And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail 
Are turned to one thread, one little hair.
My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
Which holds but till thy news be uttered,
And then all this thou seest is but a clod
And module of confounded royalty.
The Dolphin is preparing hitherward,
Where [God] he knows how we shall answer him;
For in a night the best part of my pow'r,
As I upon advantage did remove,
Were in the Washes all unwarily
Devoured by the unexpected flood. 
You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.
My liege, my lord! but now a king, now thus.
Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
When this was now a king, and now is clay?
Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind
To do the office for thee of revenge,
And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven,
As it on earth hath been thy servant still. 
Now, now, you stars, that move in your right spheres,
Where be your pow'rs? Show now your mended faiths, 
And instantly return with me again
To push destruction and perpetual shame
Out of the weak door of our fainting land.
Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought;
The Dolphin rages at our very heels.
It seems you know not then so much as we.
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
Who half an hour since came from the Dolphin,
And brings from him such offers of our peace
As we with honor and respect may take,
With purpose presently to leave this war.
He will the rather do it when he sees
Ourselves well sinewed to our defense.
Nay,'tis in a manner done already,
For many carriages he hath dispatched
To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel
To the disposing of the Cardinal,
With whom yourself, myself, and other lords,
If you think meet, this afternoon will post
To consummate this business happily.
Let it be so, and you, my noble Prince, 
With other princes that may best be spared,
Shall wait upon your father's funeral. 
At Worcester must his body be interred, 
For so he willed it. Thither shall it then;
And happily may your sweet self put on
The lineal state and glory of the land!
To whom with all submission, on my knee,
I do bequeath my faithful services
And true subjection everlastingly.
And the like tender of our love we make,
To rest without a spot for evermore.
I have a kind soul that would give thanks,
And knows not how to do it but with tears.
O, let us pay the time but needful woe,
Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.
This England never did, nor never shall,
Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,
But when it first did help to wound itself.
Now these her princes are come home again,
Come the three corners of the world in arms,
And we shall shock them. Nought shall make us rue,
If England to itself do rest but true. 
<MOVvs> In sooth, I know not why I am so sad; 
It wearies me, you say it wearies you; 
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it, 
What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born, 
And such a want-wit sadness makes of me, 
That I have much ado to know myself. 
There where your argosies with portly sail 
Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood, 
Or as it were the pageants of the sea, 
Do overpeer the petty traffickers 
That cur'sy to them, do them reverence, 
As they fly by them with their woven wings. 
Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth, 
The better part of my affections would  
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still 
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,  
Piring in maps for ports and piers and roads;  
And every object that might make me fear 
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt 
Would make me sad.  My wind cooling my broth 
Would blow me to an ague when I thought 
What harm a wind too great might do at sea. 
I should not see the sandy hour-glass run 
But I should think of shallows and of flats, 
And see my wealthy  [docked] in sand, 
Vailing her high top lower than her ribs 
To kiss her burial.  Should I go to church 
And see the holy edifice of stone, 
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks, 
Which touching but my gentle vessel's side 
Would scatter all her spices on the stream, 
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks, 
And in a word, but even now worth this, 
And now worth nothing?  Shall I have the thought 
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought 
That such a thing bechanced would make me sad?  
But tell not me; I know Antonio 
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.  
Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it,  
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, 
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate 
Upon the fortune of this present year: 
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad. 
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad 
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy 
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry 
Because you are not sad. Now by two-headed Janus, 
Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time: 
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes, 
And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper; 
And other of such vinegar aspect 
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile 
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable. 
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman, 
Gratiano, and Lorenzo.  Fare ye well,  
We leave you now with better company. 
I would have stayed till I had made you merry, 
If worthier friends had not prevented me. 
Your worth is very dear in my regard. 
I take it your own business calls on you, 
And you embrace th' occasion to depart. 
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? say, when? 
You grow exceeding strange.  Must it be so? 
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours. 
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio, 
We two will leave you, but at dinner-time 
I pray you have in mind where we must meet. 
You look not well, Signior Antonio, 
You have too much respect upon the world. 
They lose it that do buy it with much care. 
Believe me you are marvellously changed. 
I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano,  
A stage, where every man must play a part, 
And mine a sad one.   Let me play the fool,  
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come, 
And let my liver rather heat with wine 
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans. 
Why should a man, whose blood is warm within, 
Sit like his grandsire cut in alablaster? 
Sleep when he wakes? and creep into the jaundies 
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio -- 
I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks -- 
There are a sort of men whose visages 
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond, 
And do a willful stillness entertain, 
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion 
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit, 
As who should say,"I am Sir Oracle, 
And when I ope my lips let no dog bark!" 
O my Antonio, I do know of these 
That therefore only are reputed wise 
For saying nothing; when I am very sure 
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears 
Which hearing them would call their brothers fools.  
I'll tell thee more of this another time; 
But fish not with this melancholy bait  
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.  
Come, good Lorenzo.  Fare ye well a while, 
I'll end my exhortation after dinner. 
Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time. 
I must be one of these same dumb wise men, 
For Gratiano never lets me speak. 
Well, keep me company but two years moe, 
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue. 
Fare you well! I'll grow a talker for this gear. 
Well, tell me now what lady is the same 
To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,  
That you today promised to tell me of? 
'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,  
How much I have disabled mine estate,  
By something showing a more swelling port 
Than my faint means would grant continuance. 
Nor do I now make moan to be abridged 
From such a noble rate, but my chief care 
Is to come fairly off from the great debts 
Wherein my time something too prodigal 
Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio, 
I owe the most in money and in love, 
And from your love I have a warranty 
To unburthen all my plots and purposes 
How to get clear of all the debts I owe. 
I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it, 
And if it stand, as you yourself still do, 
Within the eye of honor, be assured 
My purse, my person, my extremest means, 
In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft, 
I shot his fellow of the self-same flight 
The self-same way with more advised watch 
I oft found both.  I urge this childhood proof, 
Because what follows is pure innocence.  
I owe you much, and like a willful youth,  
That which I owe is lost, but if you please 
To shoot another arrow that self way 
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt, 
As I will watch the aim, or to find both 
Or bring your latter hazard back again, 
And thankfully rest debtor for the first. 
You know me well, and herein spend but time 
To wind about my love with circumstance, 
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong 
In making question of my uttermost 
Than if you had made waste of all I have. 
Then do but say to me what I should do 
That in your knowledge may by me be done, 
And I am prest unto it; therefore speak. 
In Belmont is a lady richly left, 
And she is fair and, fairer than that word, 
Of wondrous virtues.  Sometimes from her eyes 
I did receive fair speechless messages. 
Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued 
To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia.  
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, 
For the four winds blow in from every coast  
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks  
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece, 
Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchis' strond, 
And many Jasons come in quest of her. 
O my Antonio, had I but the means 
To hold a rival place with one of them, 
I have a mind presages me such thrift 
That I should questionless be fortunate! 
Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea, 
Neither have I money nor commodity 
To raise a present sum; therefore go forth, 
Try what my credit can in Venice do. 
That shall be racked, even to the uttermost, 
To furnish thee to Belmont, to fair Portia. 
Go presently inquire, and so will I, 
Where money is, and I no question make 
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.   
How like a fawning publican he looks!  
But more, for that in low simplicity 
He lends out money gratis, and brings down 
The rate of usance here with us in Venice. 
If I can catch him once upon the hip, 
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him. 
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails 
Even there where merchants most do congregate 
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift, 
Which he calls interest.  Cursed be my tribe 
If I forgive him!   Shylock, do you hear? 
I am debating of my present store, 
And by the near guess of my memory, 
I cannot instantly raise up the gross 
Of full three thousand ducats. What of that? 
Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe, 
Will furnish me. But soft, how many months 
Do you desire?   Rest you fair, good signior, 
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.  
Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow 
By taking nor by giving of excess,  
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,  
I'll break a custom.   Is he yet possessed 
How much ye would?  Ay, ay, three thousand ducats. 
I had forgot -- three months --  you told me so. 
Well then, your bond; and let me see -- but hear you, 
Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow 
Upon advantage.   I do never use it. 
When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban's sheep -- 
This Jacob from our holy Abram was 
(As his wise mother wrought in his behalf) 
The third possessor; ay, he was the third -- 
And what of him? did he take interest? 
No, not take interest, not as you would say 
Directly int'rest. Mark what Jacob did: 
When Laban and himself were compremised 
That all the eanlings which were streaked and pied 
Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes being rank  
In end of autumn turned to the rams, 
And when the work of generation was  
Between these woolly breeders in the act,  
The skillful shepherd pilled me certain wands, 
And in the doing of the deed of kind, 
He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, 
Who then conceiving did in eaning time 
Fall parti-colored lambs, and those were Jacob's. 
This was a way to thrive, and he was blest; 
And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not. 
This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for, 
A thing not in his power to bring to pass, 
But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven. 
Was this inserted to make interest good? 
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams? 
I cannot tell, I make it breed as fast. 
But note me, signior.   Mark you this, Bassanio, 
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. 
An evil soul producing holy witness 
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, 
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.  
O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath! 
Three thousand ducats -- 'tis a good round sum.  
Three months from twelve; then let me see, the rate -- 
Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you? 
Signior Antonio, many a time and oft 
In the Rialto you have rated me 
About my moneys and my usances. 
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug 
(For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe). 
You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog. 
And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine, 
And all for use of that which is mine own. 
Well then, it now appears you need my help. 
Go to then, you come to me, and you say, 
"Shylock, we would have moneys," you say so -- 
You, that did void your rheum upon my beard, 
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur 
Over your threshold; moneys is your suit. 
What should I say to you?  Should I not say, 
"Hath a dog money?  Is it possible 
A cur can lend three thousand ducats?  Or  
Shall I bend low and in a bondman's key, 
With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,  
"Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last, 
You spurned me such a day, another time 
You called me dog; and for these courtesies 
I am as like to call thee so again, 
To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too. 
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not 
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take 
A breed for barren metal of his friend? 
But lend it rather to thine enemy, 
Who if he break, thou mayst with better face 
Exact the penalty.   Why, look you how you storm! 
I would be friends with you, and have your love, 
Forget the shames that you have stained me with, 
Supply your present wants, and take no doit 
Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me. 
This were kindness. This kindness will I show.  
Go with me to a notary, seal me there 
Your single bond; and in a merry sport  
If you repay me not on such a day,  
In such a place, such sum or sums as are 
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit 
Be nominated for an equal pound 
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken 
In what part of your body pleaseth me. 
Content, in faith, I'll seal to such a bond, 
And say there is much kindness in the Jew. 
You shall not seal to such a bond for me, 
I'll rather dwell in my necessity. 
Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it. 
Within these two months, that's a month before 
This bond expires, I do expect return 
Of thrice three times the value of this bond. 
O father Abram, what these Christians are, 
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect 
The thoughts of others! Pray you tell me this: 
If he should break his day, what should I gain 
By the exaction of the forfeiture? 
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man 
Is not so estimable, profitable neither,  
As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say, 
To buy his favor, I extend this friendship.  
If he will take it, so, if not, adieu;  
And for my love I pray you wrong me not. 
Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond. 
Then meet me forthwith at the notary's; 
Give him direction for this merry bond, 
And I will go and purse the ducats straight, 
See to my house, left in the fearful guard 
Of an unthrifty knave, and presently 
I'll be with you.   Hie thee, gentle Jew. 
The Hebrew will turn Christian, he grows kind. 
I like not fair terms and a villain's mind. 
Come on, in this there can be no dismay, 
My ships come home a month before the day. 
The shadowed livery of the burnished sun, 
To whom I am a neighbor and near bred.  
Bring me the fairest creature northward born,  
Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles, 
And let us make incision for your love, 
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. 
I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine 
Hath feared the valiant; by my love, I swear 
The best-regarded virgins of our clime 
Have loved it too.  I would not change this hue, 
Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen. 
In terms of choice I am not soly led 
By nice direction of a maiden's eyes; 
Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny 
Bars me the right of voluntary choosing. 
But if my father had not scanted me, 
And hedged me by his wit to yield myself 
His wife who wins me by that means I told you, 
Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair 
As any comer I  have looked on yet 
For my affection.     Even for that I thank you; 
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets  
To try my fortune. By this scimitar 
That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince  
That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,  
I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look, 
Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth, 
Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear, 
Yea, mock the lion when 'a roars for prey, 
To win [thee], lady. But alas the while! 
If Hercules and Lichas play at dice 
Which is the better man, the greater throw 
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand: 
So is Alcides beaten by his [page], 
And so may I, blind fortune leading me, 
Miss that which one unworthier may attain, 
And die with grieving. You must take your chance, 
And either not attempt to choose at all, 
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong 
Never to speak to lady afterward 
In way of marriage; therefore be advised. 
Nor will not.  Come bring me unto my chance. 
First, forward to the temple; after dinner  
Your hazard shall be made.  Good fortune then!  
To make me blest or cursed'st among men.  
I know thee well, thou hast obtained thy suit. 
Shylock thy master spoke with me this day, 
And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment 
To leave a rich Jew's service, to become 
The follower of so poor a gentleman. 
Thou speak'st it well. Go, father, with thy son. 
Take leave of thy old master, and inquire 
My lodging out. -- Give him a livery 
More guarded than his fellows'; see it done.  
I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this: 
These things being bought and orderly bestowed, 
Return in haste, for I do feast tonight 
My best esteemed acquaintance.  Hie thee, go. 
My best endeavors shall be done herein. 
Where's your master?  Yonder, sir, he walks.  
Why  then  you  must. But hear thee, Gratiano:                          
Thou art too wild, too rude, and bold of voice -- 
Parts that become thee happily enough, 
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults, 
But where thou art not known, why, there they show 
Something too liberal. Pray thee take pain 
To allay with some cold drops of modesty 
Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior 
I be misconst'red in the place I go to, 
And lose my hopes.  Signior Bassanio, hear me: 
If I do not put on a sober habit, 
Talk with respect, and swear but now and then, 
Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely, 
Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes 
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say amen, 
Use all the observance of civility, 
Like one well studied in a sad ostent  
To please his grandam, never trust me more. 
Nay, but I bar tonight, you shall not gauge me 
By what we do tonight.   No, that were pity. 
I would entreat you rather to put on 
Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends 
That purpose merriment. But fare you well, 
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest, 
But we will visit you at supper-time.         
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so. 
Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, 
Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. 
But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee, 
And, Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see 
Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest. 
Give him this letter, do it secretly, 
And so farewell.  I would not have my father 
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me 
To be ashamed to be my father's child! 
But though I am a daughter to his blood, 
I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo, 
If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife, 
Become a Christian and thy loving wife.          
Nay, we will slink away in supper-time, 
Disguise us at my lodging, and return 
We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers. 
'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered, 
And better in my mind not undertook. 
'Tis now but four of clock, we have two hours 
To furnish us.  Friend Launcelot, what's the news?  
I know the hand; in faith,'tis a fair hand, 
And whiter than the paper it writ on 
Is the fair hand that writ.   Love-news, in faith. 
By your leave, sir.  Whither goest thou? 
Hold here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica 
I will not fail her, speak it privately.  
Will you prepare you for this masque tonight? 
I am provided of a torch-bearer. 
Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight. 
And so will I. Meet me and Gratiano 
At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence. 
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?  
I must needs tell thee all.  She hath directed 
How I shall take her from her father's house,  
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,  
What page's suit she hath in readiness. 
If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven, 
It will be for his gentle daughter's sake, 
And never dare misfortune cross her foot, 
Unless she do it under this excuse, 
That she is issue to a faithless Jew. 
Come go with me, peruse this as thou goest. 
Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer.          
Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, 
The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio. -- 
What, Jessica! -- Thou shalt not gurmandize, 
As thou hast done with me -- What, Jessica! -- 
And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out -- 
Why, Jessica, I say!   Why, Jessica! 
Who bids thee call?  I do not bid thee call.  
I am bid forth to supper, Jessica. 
There are my keys. But wherefore should I go? 
I am not bid for love, they flatter me, 
But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon 
The prodigal Christian. Jessica, my girl, 
Look to my house.  I am right loath to go; 
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, 
For I did dream of money-bags tonight. 
What, are there masques?  Hear you me, Jessica:  
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum 
And the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife, 
Clamber not you up to the casements then, 
Nor thrust your head into the public street 
To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces;  
But stop my house's ears, I mean my casements; 
Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter  
My sober house. By Jacob's staff I swear  
I have no mind of feasting forth tonight; 
But I will go. Go you before me, sirrah, 
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha? 
His words were "Farewell, mistress!" -- nothing else.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder, 
Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day 
More than the wild-cat.  Drones hive not with me, 
Therefore I part with him, and part with him 
To one that I would have him help to waste 
His borrowed purse.  Well, Jessica, go in, 
Perhaps I will return immediately. 
Do as I bid you, shut doors after you; 
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.        
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed, 
I have a father, you a daughter, lost.             
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo 
And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour, 
For lovers ever run before the clock. 
O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly 
To seal love's bonds new made, than they are wont 
To keep obliged faith unforfeited! 
That ever holds.  Who riseth from a feast 
With that keen appetite that he sits down? 
Where is the horse that doth untread again 
His tedious measures with the unbated fire 
That he did pace them first? All things that are, 
Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed. 
How like a younger or a prodigal 
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay, 
Hugged and embraced by the strumpet wind! 
How like the prodigal doth she return, 
With over-weathered ribs and ragged sails,  
Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind! 
Here comes Lorenzo, more of this hereafter.  
Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode; 
Not I but my affairs have made you wait. 
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives, 
I'll watch as long for you then.  Approach, 
Here dwells my father Jew.  Ho! who's within? 
Who are you? tell me for more certainty, 
Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue. 
Lorenzo, certain, and my love indeed, 
For who love I so much?  And now who knows 
But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours? 
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art. 
Here, catch this casket, it is worth the pains. 
I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me, 
For I am much ashamed of my exchange. 
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see 
The pretty follies that themselves commit,  
For if they could, Cupid himself would blush 
To see me thus transformed to a boy.  
Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.  
What, must I hold a candle to my shames? 
They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light. 
Why,'tis an office of discovery, love, 
And I should be obscured.  So are you, sweet, 
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy. 
For the close night doth play the runaway, 
And we are stayed for at Bassanio's feast. 
I will make fast the doors, and gild myself 
With some moe ducats, and be with you straight. 
Now by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew. 
Beshrow me but I love her heartily, 
For she is wise, if I can judge of her, 
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true, 
And true she is, as she hath proved herself; 
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true, 
Shall she be placed in my constant soul. 
What, art thou come?  On, [gentlemen], away! 
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.  
Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest? 
'Tis nine a' clock -- our friends all stay for you. 
No masque tonight, the wind is come about, 
Bassanio presently will go aboard. 
I have sent twenty out to seek for you. 
I am glad on't.  I desire no more delight 
Than to be under sail, and gone tonight.       
Go, draw aside the curtains and discover 
The several caskets to this noble prince. 
This first, of gold, who this inscription bears, 
The second, silver, which this promise carries,  
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,  
How shall I know if I do choose the right? 
The one of them contains my picture, Prince: 
If you choose that, then I am yours withal. 
Some god direct my judgment!  Let me see, 
I will survey th' inscriptions back again. 
Must give -- for what? for lead, hazard for lead? 
This casket threatens. Men that hazard all 
Do it in hope of fair advantages; 
A  golden mind stoops not to shows of dross. 
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead. 
What says the silver with her virgin hue? 
As much as he deserves! pause there, Morocco, 
And weigh thy value with an even hand. 
If thou beest rated by thy estimation, 
Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough 
May not extend so far as to the lady; 
And yet to be afeard of my deserving  
Were but a weak disabling of myself. 
As much as I deserve! why, that's the lady.  
I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,  
In graces, and in qualities of breeding; 
But more than these, in love I do deserve. 
What if I  strayed no farther, but chose here? 
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold: 
Why, that's the lady, all the world desires her. 
From the four corners of the earth they come 
To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint. 
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds 
Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now 
For princes to come view fair Portia. 
The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head 
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar 
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come 
As o'er a brook to see fair Portia. 
One of these three contains her heavenly picture. 
Is't like that lead contains her?  'Twere damnation 
To think so base a thought; it were too gross 
To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave. 
Or shall I think in silver she's immured,  
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold? 
O sinful thought! never so rich a gem  
Was set in worse than gold.  They have in England  
A coin that bears the figure of an angel 
Stamped in gold, but that's insculped upon; 
But here an angel in a golden bed 
Lies all within. Deliver me the key. 
Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may! 
There take it, Prince, and if my form lie there, 
Then I am yours.   O hell! what have we here? 
A carrion Death, within whose empty eye 
There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing. 
Portia, adieu.  I have too grieved a heart  
To take a tedious leave; thus losers part.  
A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go. 
Let all of his complexion choose me so.        
Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail, 
With him is Gratiano gone along. 
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not. 
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke, 
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship. 
He came too late, the ship was under sail, 
But there the Duke was given to understand 
That in a gondilo were seen together 
Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica. 
Besides, Antonio certified the Duke 
They were not with Bassanio in his ship. 
I never heard a passion so confused, 
So strange, outrageous, and so variable 
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets. 
"My daughter!  O my ducats! O my daughter!  
Fled with a Christian!  O my Christian ducats! 
Justice! the law! my ducats, and my daughter!  
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,  
Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter! 
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones, 
Stol'n by my daughter!  Justice! find the girl, 
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats." 
Why, all the boys in Venice follow him, 
Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats. 
Let good Antonio look he keep his day, 
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday, 
Who told me, in the Narrow Seas that part 
The French and English, there miscarried 
A vessel of our country richly fraught. 
I thought upon Antonio when he told me, 
And wished in silence that it were not his. 
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear, 
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him. 
A kinder gentleman treads not the earth. 
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part: 
Bassanio told him he would make some speed  
Of his return; he answered,"Do not so, 
[Slubber] not business for my sake, Bassanio, 
But stay the very riping of the time; 
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me, 
Let it not enter in your mind of love. 
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts  
To courtship, and such fair ostents of love 
As shall conveniently become you there."  
And even there, his eye being big with tears,  
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him, 
And with affection wondrous sensible 
He wrung Bassanio's hand, and so they parted. 
I think he only loves the world for him. 
I  pray thee let us go and find him out 
And quicken his embraced heaviness 
With some delight or other.  Do we so.        
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight; 
The prince of Arragon hath taken his oath, 
And comes to his election presently. 
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince 
If you choose that wherein I am contained, 
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized; 
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,  
You must be gone from hence immediately. 
I am enjoined by oath to observe three things:  
First, never to unfold to any one  
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail 
Of the right casket, never in my life 
If I do fail in fortune of my choice, 
Immediately to leave you, and be gone. 
To these injunctions every one doth swear 
That comes to hazard for my worthless self. 
And so have I addressed me.  Fortune now 
To my heart's hope!  Gold, silver, and base lead. 
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard. 
What says the golden chest?  Ha, let me see: 
By the fool multitude that choose by show, 
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach, 
Which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet 
Builds in the weather on the outward wall, 
Even in the force and road of casualty.  
I will not choose what many men desire, 
Because I will not jump with common spirits,  
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.  
Why then to thee, thou silver treasure house, 
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear: 
And well said too; for who shall go about 
To cozen fortune, and be honorable 
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume 
To wear an undeserved dignity. 
O that estates, degrees, and offices 
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor 
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer! 
How many then should cover that stand bare? 
How many be commanded that command? 
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned 
From the true seed of honor? and how much honor 
Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times 
To be new varnished? Well, but to my choice: 
And instantly unlock my fortunes here. 
Too long a pause for that which you find there.  
What's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot,  
Presenting me a schedule!  I will read it. 
How much unlike art thou to Portia! 
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! 
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head? 
Is that my prize?  Are my deserts no better? 
To offend and judge are distinct offices, 
And of opposed natures.   What is here? 
O, these deliberate fools, when they do choose, 
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose. 
The ancient saying is no heresy, 
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny. 
Where is my lady?   Here; what would my lord? 
Madam, there is alighted at your gate 
A young Venetian, one that comes before 
To signify th' approaching of his lord, 
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets. 
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath), 
Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen 
So likely an embassador of love. 
A day in April never came so sweet,  
To show how costly summer was at hand, 
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.  
No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard  
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, 
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him. 
Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see 
Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly. 
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two 
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong 
I lose your company; therefore forbear a while. 
There's something tells me (but it is not love) 
I would not lose you, and you know yourself, 
Hate counsels not in such a quality. 
But lest you should not understand me well -- 
And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought -- 
I would detain you here some month or two 
Before you venture for me. I could teach you 
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn. 
So will I never be, so may you miss me, 
But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin, 
That I had been forsworn.  Beshrow your eyes, 
They have o'erlooked me and divided me: 
One half of me is yours, the other half yours -- 
Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,  
And so all yours. O, these naughty times 
Puts bars between the owners and their rights!  
And so though yours, not yours.  Prove it so,  
Let fortune go to hell for it, not I. 
I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time, 
To eche it, and to draw it out in length, 
To stay you from election.    Let me choose, 
For as I am, I live upon the rack. 
Upon the rack, Bassanio! then confess 
What treason there is mingled with your love. 
None but that ugly treason of mistrust, 
Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love; 
There may as well be amity and life 
'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love. 
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack, 
Where men enforced do speak any thing. 
Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth. 
Well then, confess and live.   Confess and love 
Had been the very sum of my confession. 
O happy torment, when my torturer 
Doth teach me answers for deliverance!  
But let me to my fortune and the caskets. 
Away then!  I am locked in one of them;  
If you do love me, you will find me out.  
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof. 
Let music sound while he doth make his choice; 
Then if he lose he makes a swan-like end, 
Fading in music. That the comparison 
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream 
And wat'ry death-bed for him.  He may win, 
And what is music then? Then music is 
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow 
To a new-crowned monarch; such it is 
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day 
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear, 
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes, 
With no less presence, but with much more love, 
Than young Alcides, when he did redeem 
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy 
To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice; 
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives, 
With bleared visages, come forth to view 
The issue of th' exploit. Go, Hercules, 
Live thou, I live; with much, much more dismay  
I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray. 
So may the outward shows be least themselves -- 
The world is still deceived with ornament. 
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt 
But, being seasoned with a gracious voice, 
Obscures the show of evil?  In religion, 
What damned error but some sober brow 
Will bless it, and approve it with a text, 
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament? 
There is no [vice] so simple but assumes  
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts. 
How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false  
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins  
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars, 
Who inward searched, have livers white as milk, 
And these assume but valor's excrement 
To render them redoubted! Look on beauty, 
And you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight, 
Which therein works a miracle in nature, 
Making them lightest that wear most of it. 
So are those crisped snaky golden locks, 
Which [make] such wanton gambols with the wind 
Upon supposed fairness, often known 
To be the dowry of a second head, 
The skull that bred them in the sepulchre. 
Thus ornament is but the gilded shore 
To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf 
Veiling an Indian beauty in a word, 
The seeming truth which cunning times put on 
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee; 
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge 
'Tween man and man; but thou, thou meagre lead,  
Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught, 
Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence,  
And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!  
How all the other passions fleet to air, 
As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair, 
And shudd'ring fear, and green-eyed jealousy! 
O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy, 
ln measure rain thy joy, scant this excess! 
I feel too much thy blessing; make it less, 
Fair portia's counterfeit! What demigod 
Hath come so near creation?  Move these eyes? 
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine, 
Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips, 
Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar 
Should sunder such sweet friends.  Here in her hairs 
The painter plays the spider, and hath woven 
A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men 
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes -- 
How could he see to do them?  Having made one,  
Methinks it should have power to steal both his 
And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far  
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow  
In underprizing it, so far this shadow 
Doth limp behind the substance.  Here's the scroll, 
The continent and summary of my fortune. 
A gentle scroll.  Fair lady, by your leave, 
I come by note, to give and to receive. 
Like one of two contending in a prize, 
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes, 
Hearing applause and universal shout, 
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt 
Whether those peals of praise be his or no, 
So, thrice-fair lady, stand I, even so, 
As doubtful whether what I see be true,  
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you. 
You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,  
Such as I am. Though for myself alone  
I would not be ambitious in my wish 
To wish myself much better, yet for you, 
I would be trebled twenty times myself, 
That only to stand high in your account, 
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends, 
Exceed account.  But the full sum of me 
Is sum of something; which, to term in gross, 
Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticed, 
Happy in this, she is not yet so old 
But she may learn; happier than this, 
She is not bred so dull but she can learn; 
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit 
Commits itself to yours to be directed, 
As from her lord, her governor, her king. 
Myself, and what is mine, to you and yours 
Is now converted. But now I was the lord 
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants, 
Queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,  
This house, these servants, and this same myself 
Are yours -- my lord's! -- I give them with this ring,  
Which when you part from, lose, or give away,  
Let it presage the ruin of your love, 
And be my vantage to exclaim on you. 
Madam, you have bereft me of all words, 
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins, 
And there is such confusion in my powers, 
As after some oration fairly spoke 
By a beloved prince, there doth appear 
Among the buzzing pleased multitude, 
Where every something, being blent together, 
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy 
Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring 
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence; 
O then be bold to say Bassanio's dead! 
My lord and lady, it is now our time, 
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper, 
To cry good joy. Good joy, my lord and lady! 
My Lord Bassanio and my gentle lady, 
I wish you all the joy that you can wish; 
For I am sure you can wish none from me; 
And when your honors mean to solemnize 
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you 
Even at that time I may be married too. 
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife. 
I thank your lordship, you have got me one.  
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours: 
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid;  
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you; 
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there, 
And so did mine too as the matter falls; 
For wooing here until I sweat again, 
And swearing till my very [roof] was dry 
With oaths of love, at last, if promise last, 
I got a promise of this fair one here 
To have her love -- provided that your fortune 
Achieved her mistress.   Is this true, Nerissa? 
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal. 
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith? 
Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage. 
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither, 
If that the youth of my new int'rest here 
Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave, 
I bid my very friends and countrymen, 
Sweet portia, welcome.  So do I, my lord, 
I thank your honor. For my part, my lord, 
My purpose was not to have seen you here, 
But meeting with Salerio by the way, 
He did entreat me, past all saying nay, 
To come with him along.   I did, my lord, 
And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio 
Commends him to you.   Ere I ope his letter, 
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth. 
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind, 
Nor well, unless in mind.  His letter there  
Nerissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.  
Your hand, Salerio.  What's the news from Venice?  
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio? 
I  know he will be glad of our success; 
We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece. 
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost. 
There are some shrowd contents in yond same paper 
That steals the color from Bassanio's cheek -- 
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world 
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse! 
With leave, Bassanio, I am half yourself, 
That this same paper brings you.  O sweet Portia, 
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words 
That ever blotted paper! Gentle lady, 
When I did first impart my love to you, 
I freely told you all the wealth I had 
Ran in my veins: I was a gentleman;  
And then I told you true.  And yet, dear lady, 
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see  
How much I was a braggart: when I told you  
My state was nothing, I should then have told you 
That I  was worse than nothing; for indeed 
I have engaged myself to a dear friend, 
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy, 
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady, 
The paper as the body of my friend, 
And every word in it a gaping wound 
Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio? 
Hath all his ventures failed?  What, not one hit? 
From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England, 
From Lisbon, Barbary, and India, 
And not one vessel scape the dreadful touch 
Of merchant-marring rocks?   Not one, my lord. 
Besides, it should appear, that if he had 
The present money to discharge the Jew, 
He would not take it.  Never did I know 
A  creature that did bear the shape of man 
So keen and greedy to confound a man. 
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,  
And doth impeach the freedom of the state, 
If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,  
The Duke himself, and the magnificoes  
Of greatest port, have all persuaded with him, 
But none can drive him from the envious plea 
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond. 
When I was with him I have heard him swear 
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen, 
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh 
Than twenty times the value of the sum 
That he did owe him; and I know, my lord, 
If law, authority, and power deny not, 
It will go hard with poor Antonio. 
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble? 
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man, 
The best-conditioned and unwearied spirit 
In doing courtesies, and one in whom 
The ancient Roman honor more appears 
Than any that draws breath in Italy. 
For me, three thousand ducats.  What, no more? 
Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond;  
Double six thousand, and then treble that, 
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.  
First go with me to church and call me wife, 
And then away to Venice to your friend; 
For never shall you lie by Portia's side 
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold 
To pay the petty debt twenty times over. 
When it is paid, bring your true friend along. 
My maid Nerissa and myself mean time 
Will live as maids and widows.  Come away! 
For you shall hence upon your wedding-day. 
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer -- 
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear. 
But let me hear the letter of your friend. 
O love! dispatch all business and be gone. 
Since I have your good leave to go away,  
I will make haste; but till I come again,  
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay, 
Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain.         
Jailer, look to him, tell not me of mercy. 
This is the fool that lent out money gratis. 
Jailer, look to him.  Hear me yet, good Shylock. 
I'll have my bond, speak not against my bond, 
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond. 
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause, 
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs. 
The Duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder, 
Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond 
To come abroad with him at his request. 
I'll have my bond; I will not hear thee speak. 
I'll have my bond, and therefore speak no more. 
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool  
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield 
To Christian intercessors.  Follow not,  
I'll have no speaking, I will have my bond.   
It is the most impenetrable cur 
That ever kept with men.   Let him alone, 
I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers. 
He seeks my life; his reason well I know: 
I oft delivered from his forfeitures 
Many that have at times made moan to me; 
Therefore he hates me.   I am sure the Duke 
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold. 
The Duke cannot deny the course of law; 
For the commodity that strangers have 
With us in Venice, if it be denied, 
Will much impeach the justice of the state, 
Since that the trade and profit of the city 
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore go. 
These griefs and losses have so bated me 
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh 
tomorrow to my bloody creditor. 
Well, jailer, on.  Pray God Bassanio come  
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not!   
Madam, although I speak it in your presence, 
You have a noble and a true conceit 
Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly 
In bearing thus the absence of your lord. 
But if you knew to whom you show this honor, 
How true a gentleman you send relief, 
How dear a lover of my lord your husband, 
I know you would be prouder of the work 
Than customary bounty can enforce you. 
I never did repent for doing good, 
Nor shall not now: for in companions 
That do converse and waste the time together, 
Whose souls do bear an egall yoke of love, 
There must be needs a like proportion 
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit; 
Which makes me think that this Antonio, 
Being the bosom lover of my lord,  
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, 
How little is the cost I have bestowed  
In purchasing the semblance of my soul,  
From out the state of hellish cruelty. 
This comes too near the praising of myself, 
Therefore no more of it.  [Hear] other things: 
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands 
The husbandry and manage of my house 
Until my lord's return. For mine own part, 
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow 
To live in prayer and contemplation, 
Only attended by Nerissa here, 
Until her husband and my lord's return. 
There is a monast'ry two miles off, 
And there we will abide.  I do desire you 
The which my love and some necessity 
Now lays upon you.  Madam, with all my heart, 
I shall obey you in all fair commands. 
My people do already know my mind, 
And will acknowledge you and Jessica 
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.  
So fare you well till we shall meet again. 
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!  
I wish your ladyship all heart's content.  
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased 
As I have ever found thee honest-true, 
So let me find thee still.  Take this same letter, 
And use thou all th' endeavor of a man. 
In speed to [Padua].  See thou render this 
Into my [cousin's] hands, Doctor Bellario, 
And look what notes and garments he doth give thee, 
Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed  
Unto the [traject], to the common ferry 
Which trades to Venice.  Waste no time in words,  
But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.  
Madam, I go with all convenient speed. 
Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand 
That you yet know not of.  We'll see our husbands 
Before they think of us.   Shall they see us? 
They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit 
That they shall think we are accomplished 
With that we lack.  I'll hold thee any wager, 
When we are both accoutered like young men, 
I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two, 
And wear my dagger with the braver grace, 
And speak between the change of man and boy 
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps 
Into a manly stride; and speak of frays 
Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies, 
How honorable ladies sought my love, 
Which I denying, they fell sick and died. 
I could not do withal. Then I'll repent, 
And wish, for all that, that I had not killed them;  
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell, 
That men shall swear I have discontinued school  
Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind  
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks, 
Which I will practice.  Why, shall we turn to men? 
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter! 
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device 
When I am in my coach, which stays for us 
At the park-gate; and therefore haste away, 
For we must measure twenty miles today.     
O dear discretion, how his words are suited! 
The fool hath planted in his memory 
An army of good words, and I do know 
A many fools, that stand in better place, 
Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word 
Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica? 
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion, 
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife? 
Past all expressing.  It is very meet 
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life, 
For having such a blessing in his lady, 
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth, 
And if on earth he do not [merit] it,  
In reason he should never come to heaven! 
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,  
And on the wager lay two earthly women,  
And Portia one, there must be something else 
Pawned with the other, for the poor rude world 
Hath not her fellow.    Even such a husband 
Hast thou of me as she is for [a] wife. 
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that. 
I will anon, first let us go to dinner. 
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach. 
No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk; 
Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things 
I shall disgest it.   Well, I'll set you forth.   
I am sorry for thee.  Thou art come to answer 
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,  
Uncapable of pity, void and empty 
From any dram of mercy.  I have heard  
Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify 
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate, 
And that no lawful means can carry me 
Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose 
My patience to his fury, and am armed 
To suffer, with a quietness of spirit, 
The very tyranny and rage of his. 
Go one, and call the Jew into the court. 
He is ready at the door; he comes, my lord. 
Make room, and let him stand before our face. 
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too, 
That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice 
To the last hour of act, and then 'tis thought 
Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange 
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty; 
And where thou now exacts the penalty, 
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh, 
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,  
But touched with humane gentleness and love, 
Forgive a moi'ty of the principal,  
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,  
That have of late so huddled on his back, 
Enow to press a royal merchant down, 
And pluck commiseration of [his state] 
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flints, 
From stubborn Turks, and Tartars never trained 
To offices of tender courtesy. 
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew! 
I have possessed your Grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabaoth have I sworn 
To have the due and forfeit of my bond. 
If you deny it, let the danger light 
Upon your charter and your city's freedom! 
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have 
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive 
Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that; 
But say it is my humor, is it answered? 
What if my house be troubled with a rat, 
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats 
To have it banned?  What, are you answered yet?  
Some men there are love not a gaping pig; 
Some that are mad if they behold a cat;  
And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,  
Cannot contain their urine: for affection, 
[Mistress] of passion, sways it to the mood 
Of what it likes or loathes. Now fur your answer: 
As there is no firm reason to be rend'red 
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig. 
Why he, a harmless necessary cat; 
Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force 
Must yield to such inevitable shame 
As to offend, himself being offended; 
So can I give no reason, nor I will not, 
More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing 
I bear Antonio, that I follow thus 
A losing suit against him. Are you answered? 
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man, 
To excuse the current of thy cruelty. 
I am not bound to please thee with my answers. 
Do all men kill the things they do not love? 
Hates any man the thing he would not kill? 
Every offense is not a hate at first.  
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?  
I pray you think you question with the Jew:  
You may as well go stand upon the beach 
And bid the main flood bate his usual height; 
You may as well use question with the wolf 
Why he hath made the ewe bleak fur the lamb; 
You may as well forbid the mountain pines 
To wag their high tops, and to make no noise 
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven; 
You may as well do any thing most hard 
As seek to soften that -- than which what's harder? -- 
His Jewish heart!  Therefore I do beseech you 
Make no moe offers, use no further means, 
But with all brief and plain conveniency 
Let me have judgment and the Jew his will. 
For thy three thousand ducats here is six. 
If every ducat in six thousand ducats 
Were in six parts, and every part a ducat, 
I would not draw them, I would have my bond. 
How shalt thou hope fur mercy, rend'ring none? 
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?  
You have among you many a purchased slave, 
Which like your asses, and your dogs and mules,  
You use in abject and in slavish pads,  
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you, 
"Let them be free!  Marry them to your heirs! 
Why sweat they under burthens?  Let their beds 
Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates 
Be seasoned with such viands"?  You will answer,  
"The slaves are ours." So do I answer you: 
The pound of flesh which I demand of him  
Is dearly bought as mine, and I will have it.  
If you deny me, fie upon your law! 
There is no force in the decrees of Venice. 
I stand for judgment. Answer -- shall I have it? 
Upon my power I may dismiss this court, 
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor, 
Whom I have sent for to determine this, 
Come here today.  My lord, here stays without 
A messenger with letters from the doctor, 
Bring us the letters; call the messenger. 
Good cheer, Antonio! what, man, courage yet! 
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all, 
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood. 
I am a tainted wether of the flock, 
Meetest for death; the weakest kind of fruit 
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me. 
You cannot better be employed, Bassanio, 
Than to live still and write mine epitaph.  
Came you from Padua, from Bellario?  
From both, my lord.  Bellario greets your Grace.   
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?  
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrout there. 
Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew, 
Thou mak'st thy knife keen; but no metal can, 
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness 
Of thy sharp envy.  Can no prayers pierce thee? 
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make. 
O, be thou damned, inexecrable dog! 
And for thy life let justice be accused. 
Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith 
To hold opinion with Pythagoras, 
That souls of animals infuse themselves 
Into the trunks of men.  Thy currish spirit 
Governed a wolf, who hanged for human slaughter, 
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, 
And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam, 
Infused itself in thee; for thy desires  
Are wolvish, bloody, starved, and ravenous. 
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,  
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud.  
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will full 
To cureless ruin.  I stand here for law. 
This letter from Bellario doth commend 
A young and learned doctor to our court. 
Where is he?  He attendeth here hard by 
To know your answer, whether you'll admit him. 
With all my heart.  Some three or four of you 
Go give him courteous conduct to this place. 
Mean time the court shall hear Bellario's letter. 
You hear the learned Bellario, what he writes, 
And here I take it is the doctor come. 
Give me your hand.  Come you from old Bellario? 
I did, my lord.  You are welcome, take your place. 
Are you acquainted with the difference 
That holds this present question in the court? 
I am informed throughly of the cause. 
Which is the merchant here? and which the Jew? 
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth. 
Is your name Shylock?  Shylock is my name. 
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,  
Yet in such rule that the Venetian law 
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed. --  
You stand within his danger, do you not?  
Ay, so he says.  Do you confess the bond? 
I do.  Then must the Jew be merciful. 
On what compulsion must I? tell me that. 
The quality of mercy is not strained, 
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven 
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest: 
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 
'Tis mightiest in the mightiest, it becomes 
The throned monarch better than his crown. 
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power, 
The attribute to awe and majesty, 
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings; 
But mercy is above this sceptred sway, 
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, 
It is an attribute to God himself; 
And earthly power doth then show likest God's 
When mercy seasons justice.  Therefore, Jew, 
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,  
That in the course of justice, none of us 
Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy,  
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render  
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much 
To mitigate the justice of thy plea, 
Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice 
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there. 
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law, 
The penalty and forfeit of my bond. 
Is he not able to discharge the money? 
Yes, here I tender it for him in the court, 
Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice, 
I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er, 
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart. 
If this will not suffice, it must appear 
That malice bears down truth.   And I beseech you 
Wrest once the law to your authority: 
To do a great right, do a little wrong, 
And curb this cruel devil of his will. 
It must not be, there is no power in Venice 
Can alter a decree established. 
'Twill be recorded for a precedent,  
And many an error by the same example 
Will rush into the state.  It cannot be.  
A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel!  
O wise young judge, how I do honor thee! 
I pray you let me look upon the bond. 
Here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is. 
Shylock, there's thrice thy money off'red thee. 
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven! 
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul? 
[No], not for Venice.  Why, this bond is forfeit, 
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim 
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off 
Nearest the merchant's heart.  Be merciful, 
Take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond. 
When it is paid according to the tenure. 
It doth appear you are a worthy judge; 
Hath been most sound.  I charge you by the law, 
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar, 
Proceed to judgment.  By my soul I swear 
There is no power in the tongue of man 
To alter me: I stay here on my bond.  
Most heartily I do beseech the court 
To give the judgment.   Why then thus it is:  
You must prepare your bosom for his knife -- 
O noble judge, O excellent young man! 
For the intent and purpose of the law 
Hath full relation to the penalty, 
Which here appeareth due upon the bond. 
'Tis very true.  O wise and upright judge! 
How much more elder art thou than thy looks! 
Therefore lay bare your bosom.  Ay, his breast, 
So says the bond, doth it not, noble judge? 
"Nearest his heart," those are the very words. 
It is so.  Are there balance here to weigh 
Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge, 
To stop his  wounds, lest he do bleed to death. 
Is it so nominated in the bond? 
It is not so expressed, but what of that? 
'Twere good you do so much for charity.  
I cannot find it,'tis not in the bond. 
You, merchant, have you any thing to say?  
But little; I am armed and well prepared.  
Give me your hand, Bassanio, fare you well. 
Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you; 
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind 
Than is her custom.  It is still her use 
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth, 
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow 
Of such misery doth she cut me off. 
Commend me to your honorable wife, 
Tell her the process of Antonio's end, 
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death; 
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge 
Whether Bassanio had not once a love. 
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend, 
And he repents not that he pays your debt; 
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough, 
I'll pay it instantly with all my heart. 
Antonio, I am married to a wife 
Which is as dear to me as life itself, 
But life itself, my wife, and all the world,  
Are not with me esteemed above thy life. 
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all  
Here to this devil, to deliver you.  
Your wife would give you little thanks for that 
If she were by to hear you make the offer. 
I have a wife who I protest I love; 
I would she were in heaven, so she could 
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew. 
'Tis well you offer it behind her back, 
The wish would make else an unquiet house. 
These be the Christian husbands.  I have a daughter -- 
Would any of the stock of Barrabas 
Had been her husband rather than a Christian! 
We trifle time.  I pray thee pursue sentence. 
A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine, 
The court awards it, and the law doth give it. 
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast, 
The law allows it, and the court awards it.  
Most learned judge, a sentence!  Come prepare! 
Tarry a little, there is something else.  
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood;  
The words expressly are "a pound of flesh." 
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh, 
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed 
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods 
Are by the laws of Venice confiscate 
O upright judge!  Mark, Jew.  O learned judge!  
Is that the law?   Thyself shalt see the act; 
For as thou urgest justice, be assured 
Thou shalt have justice more than thou desir'st. 
O learned judge! Mark, Jew, a learned judge! 
I take this offer then; pay the bond thrice 
And let the Christian go.  Here is the money. 
The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste. 
He shall have nothing but the penalty. 
O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge! 
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh. 
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more 
But just a pound of flesh. If thou tak'st more 
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much 
As makes it light or heavy in the substance 
Or the division of the twentith part 
Of one poor scruple, nay, if the scale do turn 
But in the estimation of a hair, 
Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.  
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.  
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.  
Give me my principal, and let me go. 
I have it ready for thee, here it is. 
He hath refused it in the open court; 
He shall have merely justice and his bond. 
A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel! 
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word. 
Shall I not have barely my principal? 
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture, 
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew. 
Why then the devil give him good of it! 
I'll stay no longer question.  Tarry, Jew, 
The law hath yet another hold on you. 
It is enacted in the laws of Venice, 
If it be proved against an alien, 
That by direct or indirect attempts 
He seek the life of any citizen, 
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive 
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half 
Comes to the privy coffer of the state,  
And the offender's life lies in the mercy 
Of the Duke only,'gainst all other voice:  
In which predicament I say thou stand'st;  
For it appears, by manifest proceeding, 
That indirectly, and directly too, 
Thou hast contrived against the very life 
Of the defendant; and thou hast incurred 
The danger formerly by me rehearsed. 
Down therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke. 
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself, 
And yet thy wealth being forfeit to the state, 
Thou hast not left the value of a cord; 
Therefore thou must be hanged at the state's charge. 
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit, 
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it. 
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's; 
The other half comes to the general state, 
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine. 
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio. 
Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that: 
You take my house when you do take the prop 
That doth sustain my house; you take my life  
When you do take the means whereby I live. 
What mercy can you render him, Antonio?  
A halter gratis -- nothing else, for God sake.  
So please my lord the Duke and all the court 
To quit the fine for one half of his goods, 
I am content; so he will let me have 
The other half in use, to render it 
Upon his death unto the gentleman 
Two things provided more, that for this favor 
The other, that he do record a gift, 
Here in the court, of all he dies possessed 
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter. 
He shall do this, or else I do recant 
The pardon that I late pronounced here. 
Art thou contented, Jew? what dost thou say? 
I am content.  Clerk, draw a deed of gift. 
I pray you give me leave to go from hence, 
I am not well. Send the deed after me, 
And I  will sign it.  Get thee gone, but do it.  
In christ'ning shalt thou have two godfathers: 
Had I  been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,  
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.  
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner. 
I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon, 
I must away this night toward padua, 
And it is meet I presently set forth. 
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not. 
Antonio, gratify this gentleman, 
For in my mind you are much bound to him. 
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend 
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted 
Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof 
Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew, 
We freely cope your courteous pains withal. 
And stand indebted, over and above, 
In love and service to you evermore. 
He is well paid that is well satisfied, 
And I, delivering you, am satisfied, 
And therein do account myself well paid. 
My mind was never yet more mercenary.  
I pray you know me when we meet again; 
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.  
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further.  
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute, 
Not as fee.  Grant me two things, I pray you, 
Not to deny me, and to pardon me. 
You press me far, and therefore I will yield. 
Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake, 
And for your love I'll take this ring from you. 
Do not draw back your hand, I'll take no more, 
And you in love shall not deny me this! 
This ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle! 
I will not shame myself to give you this. 
I will have nothing else but only this, 
And now methinks I have a mind to it. 
There's more depends on this than on the value. 
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you, 
Only for this, I pray you pardon me. 
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers.  
You taught me first to beg, and now methinks 
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.  
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,  
And when she put it on, she made me vow 
That I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it. 
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts, 
And if your wife be not a mad woman, 
And know how well I have deserved this ring, 
She would not hold out enemy for ever 
For giving it to me.  Well, peace be with you! 
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring. 
Let his deservings and my love withal 
Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandement. 
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him; 
Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst, 
Unto Antonio's house. Away, make haste. 
Come,  you and I will thither presently, 
And in the morning early will we both 
Fly toward Belmont.  Come, Antonio.           
Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed, 
And let him sign it.  We'll away tonight, 
And be a day before our husbands home. 
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo. 
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice 
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat 
Your company at dinner.   That cannot be. 
His ring I do accept most thankfully, 
And so I pray you tell him;  furthermore, 
I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house. 
That will I do.  Sir, I would speak with you. 
I'll see if I can get my husband's ring, 
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever. 
Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing  
That they did give the rings away to men; 
But we'll outface them, and outswear them too. --  
Away, make haste. Thou know'st where I will tarry.  
Come, good sir, will you show me to this  house? 
The moon shines bright.  In such a night as this, 
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees, 
And they did make no noise, in such a night 
Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls, 
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents, 
Where Cressid lay that night.  In such a night 
Did Thisby fearfully o'ertrip the dew, 
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself, 
And ran dismayed away.  In such a night 
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand 
Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love 
To come again to Carthage.   In such a night 
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs  
That did renew old Aeson.   In such a night 
Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew, 
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice, 
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well, 
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith, 
Did pretty Jessica (like a little shrow) 
Slander her love, and he forgave it her. 
I would out-night you, did nobody come; 
But hark, I hear the footing of a man. 
Who comes so fast in silence of the night? 
A friend! what friend? your name, I pray you, friend? 
Stephano is my name, and I bring word 
My mistress will before the break of day  
Be here at Belmont.  She doth stray about 
By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays  
For happy wedlock hours.   Who comes with her? 
None but a holy hermit and her maid. 
I pray you, is my master yet returned? 
He is not, nor we have not heard from him. 
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica, 
And ceremoniously let us prepare 
Some welcome for the mistress of the house. 
Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming. 
And yet no matter; why should we go in? 
My friend [Stephano], signify, I pray you, 
Within the house, your mistress is at hand, 
And bring your music forth into the air. 
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! 
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears.  Soft stillness and the night 
Become the touches of sweet harmony. 
Sit, Jessica.  Look how the floor of heaven 
Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold. 
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st 
But in his motion like an angel sings, 
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins; 
Such harmony is in immortal souls, 
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay 
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.  
Come ho, and wake Diana with a hymn,  
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear,  
I am never merry when I hear sweet music. 
The reason is, your spirits are attentive; 
For do but note a wild and wanton herd 
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts, 
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, 
Which is the hot condition of their blood, 
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound, 
Or any air of music touch their ears, 
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand, 
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze, 
By the sweet power of music; therefore the poet 
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods; 
Since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage, 
But music for the time doth change his nature. 
The man that hath no music in himself, 
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds, 
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils; 
The motions of his spirit are dull as night, 
And his affections dark as [Erebus]:.  
Let no such man be trusted.  Mark the music. 
That light we see is burning in my hall.  
How far that little candle throws his beams! 
So shines a good deed in a naughty world. 
When the moon shone, we did not see the candle. 
So doth the greater glory dim the less: 
A substitute shines brightly as a king 
Until a king be by, and then his state 
Empties itself, as doth an inland brook 
Into the main of waters. Music, hark! 
It is your music, madam, of the house. 
Nothing is good, I see, without respect; 
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day. 
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam. 
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark 
When neither is attended; and I think 
The nightingale, if she should sing by day 
When every goose is cackling, would be thought 
No better a musician than the wren. 
How many things by season seasoned are 
To their right praise and true perfection!  
Peace ho! the Moon sleeps with Endymion, 
And would not be awaked.   That is the voice,  
Or I am much deceived, of Portia. 
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo, 
By the bad voice!  Dear lady, welcome home! 
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare, 
Which speed we hope the better for our words. 
Are they returned?   Madam, they are not yet; 
But there is come a messenger before, 
To signify their coming.    Go in, Nerissa. 
Give order to my servants that they take 
No note at all of our being absent hence -- 
Nor you, Lorenzo -- Jessica, nor you. 
Your husband is at hand, I hear his trumpet. 
We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not. 
This night methinks is but the daylight sick,  
It looks a little paler.  'Tis a day, 
Such as the day is when the sun is hid.  
We should hold day with the Antipodes, 
If you would walk in absence of the sun. 
Let me give light, but let me not be light, 
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband, 
And never be Bassanio so for me -- 
But God sort all!  You are welcome home, my lord. 
I thank you, madam.  Give welcome to my friend; 
This is the man, this is Antonio, 
To whom I am so infinitely bound. 
You should in all sense be much bound to him, 
For as I hear he was much bound for you. 
No more than I am well acquitted of. 
Sir, you are very welcome to our house. 
It must appear in other ways than words, 
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy. 
By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong; 
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk. 
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,  
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart. 
A quarrel ho already! what's the matter?  
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring  
For all the world like cutler's poetry 
Upon a knife,"Love me, and leave me not." 
What talk you of the posy or the value? 
You swore to me, when I did give [it] you, 
That you would wear it till your hour of death, 
And that it should lie with you in your grave. 
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, 
You should have been respective and have kept it. 
Gave it a judge's clerk! no, God's my judge, 
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it. 
He will, and if he live to be a man. 
Ay, if a woman live to be a man. 
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth, 
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy, 
No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk, 
A prating boy, that begged it as a fee. 
I could not for my heart deny it him. 
You were to blame, I must be plain with you, 
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,  
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger, 
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.  
I gave my love a ring, and made him swear  
Never to part with it, and here he stands. 
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it, 
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth 
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano, 
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief; 
And 'twere to me I should be mad at it. 
Why, I were best to cut my left hand off, 
And swear I lost the ring defending it. 
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away 
Unto the judge that begged it, and indeed 
Deserved it too; and then the boy, his clerk, 
That took some pains in writing, he begged mine, 
And neither man nor master would take aught 
But the two rings.  What ring gave you, my lord? 
Not that, I hope, which you received of me. 
If I could add a lie unto a fault, 
I would deny it; but you see my finger 
Hath not the ring upon it, it is gone.  
Even so void is your false heart of truth. 
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed  
Until I see the ring!   Nor I in yours 
Till I again see mine!   Sweet Portia, 
If you did know to whom I gave the ring, 
If you did know for whom I gave the ring, 
And would conceive for what I gave the ring, 
And how unwillingly I left the ring, 
When nought would be accepted but the ring, 
You would abate the strength of your displeasure. 
If you had known the virtue of the ring, 
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring, 
Or your own honor to contain the ring, 
You would not then have parted with the ring. 
What man is there so much unreasonable, 
If you had pleased to have defended it 
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty 
To urge the thing held as a ceremony? 
Nerissa teaches me what to believe -- 
I'll die for't but some woman had the ring! 
No, by my honor, madam, by my soul,  
No woman had it, but a civil doctor, 
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,  
And begged the ring, the which I did deny him,  
And suffered him to go displeased away -- 
Even he that had held up the very life 
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady? 
I was enforced to send it after him, 
I was beset with shame and courtesy, 
My honor would not let ingratitude 
So much besmear it.  Pardon me, good lady, 
For by these blessed candles of the night, 
Had you been there, I think you would have begged 
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor. 
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house. 
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved, 
And that which you did swear to keep for me, 
I will become as liberal as you, 
I'll not deny him any thing I have, 
No, not my body nor my husband's bed. 
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it. 
Lie not a night from home.  Watch me like Argus; 
If you do not, if I be left alone, 
Now by mine honor, which is yet mine own,  
I'll have that doctor for [my] bedfellow. 
And I his clerk; therefore be well advised  
How you do leave me to mine own protection.  
Well, do you so; let not me take him then, 
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen. 
I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels. 
Sir, grieve not you, you are welcome notwithstanding. 
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong, 
And in the hearing of these many friends 
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes, 
Wherein I see myself -- Mark you but that! 
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself, 
In each eye, one. Swear by your double self, 
And there's an oath of credit.   Nay, but hear me. 
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear 
I never more will break an oath with thee. 
I once did lend my body for his wealth, 
Which but for him that had your husband's ring 
Had quite miscarried.  I dare be bound again, 
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord  
Will never more break faith advisedly. 
Then you shall be his surety.  Give him this,  
And bid him keep it better than the other.  
Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring. 
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor! 
I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio, 
For by this ring, the doctor lay with me. 
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano, 
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,  
In lieu of this last night did lie with me. 
Why, this is like the mending of highways  
In summer, where the ways are fair enough.  
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it? 
Speak not so grossly, you are all amazed. 
Here is a letter, read it at your leisure. 
It comes from Padua, from Bellario. 
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor, 
Nerissa there her clerk. Lorenzo here 
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you, 
And even but now returned; I have not yet 
Entered my house.  Antonio, you are welcome, 
And I have better news in store for you 
Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon; 
There you shall find three of your argosies 
Are richly come to harbor suddenly. 
You shall not know by what strange accident 
I chanced on this letter.    I am dumb. 
Were you the doctor, and I knew you not? 
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold? 
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,  
Unless he live until he be a man. 
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow --  
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.  
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living, 
For here I read for certain that my ships 
Are safely come to road.  How now, Lorenzo? 
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you. 
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee. 
There do I give to you and Jessica, 
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift, 
After his death, of all he dies possessed of. 
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way 
Of starved people.  It is almost morning, 
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied 
Of these events at full.  Let us go in, 
And charge us there upon inter'gatories, 
And we will answer all things faithfully. 
Let it be so. The first inter'gatory 
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is, 
Whether till the next night she had rather stay, 
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.  
But were the day come, I should wish it dark 
Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.  
Well, while I live I'll fear no other thing  
So sore, as keeping safe Nerissa's ring. 


