<SH5bVS> <R2 Shr MND 1H4 Rom> <R2vs> 
Old John of Gaunt, time-honored Lancaster,
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
Brought hither Henry Herford thy bold son,
Here to make good the boist'rous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,
If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
On some known ground of treachery in him?
On some apparent danger seen in him
Aimed at your Highness, no inveterate malice.
Then call them to our presence; face to face,
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
The accuser and the accused freely speak. 
High-stomached are they, both and full of ire,
In rage, deaf as the sea, hasty as fire. 
Many years of happy days befall
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
Each day still better other's happiness,
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
Add an immortal title to your crown!
We thank you both, yet one but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cause you come:
Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Herford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
First, heaven be the record to my speech,
In the devotion of a subject's love,
Tend'ring the precious safety of my prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth, 
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant, 
Too good to be so, and too bad to live, 
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat,
And wish (so please my sovereign) ere I move,
What my tongue speaks, my right drawn sword may prove.
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal.
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
The bitter clamor of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
The blood is hot that must be cooled for this.
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
As to be hushed and nought at all to say.
First, the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech,
Which else would post until it had returned
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege, 
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
Call him a slanderous coward, and a villain, 
Which to maintain I would allow him odds 
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
Mean time, let this defend my loyalty:
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the King,
And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
As to take up mine honor's pawn, then stoop.
By that, and all the rites of knighthood else,
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.
I take it up, and by that sword I swear
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
I'll answer thee in any fair degree
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial; 
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be traitor or unjustly fight! 
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that can inherit us
So much as of a thought of ill in him.
Look what I speak, my life shall prove it true:
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
In name of lendings for your Highness' soldiers,
The which he hath detained for lewd employments,
Like a false traitor and injurious villain;
Besides I say, and will in battle prove,
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That ever was surveyed by English eye,
That all the treasons for these eighteen years,
Complotted and contrived in this land,
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Further I say, and further will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a traitor coward, 
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood,
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries, 
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth, 
To me for justice and rough chastisement;
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
How high a pitch his resolution soars!
Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
O, let my sovereign turn away his face,
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears.
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
As he is but my father's brother's son,
Now by [my] sceptre's awe I make a vow,
Such neighbor nearness to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him nor partialize
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul.
He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou.
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
Then, Bullingbrook, as low as to thy heart 
Through the false passage of thy throat thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Callice 
Disbursed I duly to his Highness' soldiers; 
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt,
Upon remainder of a dear account,
Since last I went to France to fetch his queen.
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
I slew him not, but to my own disgrace
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honorable father to my foe,
Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul;
But ere I last received the sacrament
I did confess it, and exactly begged
Your Grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault. As for the rest appealed,
It issues from the rancor of a villain,
A recreant and most degenerate traitor,
Which in myself I boldly will defend,
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor's foot, 
To prove myself a loyal gentleman
Even in the best blood chambered in his bosom, 
In haste whereof, most heartily I pray 
Your Highness to assign our trial day.
Wrath-kindled [gentlemen], be ruled by me,
Let's purge this choler without letting blood.
This we prescribe, though no physician;
Deep malice makes too deep incision.
Forget, forgive, conclude and be agreed,
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
To be a make-peace shall become my age.
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
And, Norfolk, throw down his. When, Harry? when?
Obedience bids I should not bid again.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid, there is no boot.
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot,
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame: 
The one my duty owes, but my fair name,
Despite of death that lives upon my grave, 
To dark dishonor's use thou shalt not have. 
I am disgraced, impeached, and baffled here,
Pierced to the soul with slander's venomed spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
Which breathed this poison. Rage must be withstood,
Give me his gage. Lions make leopards tame.
Yea, but not change his spots. Take but my shame,
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation; that away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times-barred-up chest
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honor is my life, both grow in one,
Take honor from me, and my life is done.
Then, dear my liege, mine honor let me try;
In that I live, and for that will I die.
Cousin, throw up your gage, do you begin. 
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
Shall I seem crestfallen in my father's sight? 
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height 
Before this outdared dastard? Ere my tongue
Shall wound my honor with such feeble wrong
Or sound so base a parley, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear,
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbor, even in Mowbray's face.
We were not born to sue, but to command,
Which since we cannot do to make you friends, 
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
At Coventry upon Saint Lambert's day. 
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate 
The swelling difference of your settled hate.
Since we cannot atone you, we shall see
Justice design the victor's chivalry.
Lord Marshal, command our officers-at-arms
Be ready to direct these home alarms. 
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims
To stir against the butchers of his life!
But since correction lieth in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Who, when they see the hour's ripe on earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur? 
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one, 
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood, 
Or seven fair branches springing from one root.
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is cracked, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hacked down, and his summer leaves all faded,
By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! That bed, that womb,
That mettle, that self mould, that fashioned thee
Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
Yet art thou slain in him. Thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy father's death,
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy father's life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt, it is despair.
In suff'ring thus thy brother to be slaught'red,
Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee. 
That which in mean men we entitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts. 
What shall I say? To safeguard thine own life 
The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
God's is the quarrel, for God's substitute,
His deputy anointed in His sight,
Hath caused his death, the which if wrongfully,
Let heaven revenge, for I may never lift
An angry arm against His minister.
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
To God, the widow's champion and defense.
Why then I will. Farewell, old Gaunt!
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
Our cousin Herford and fell Mowbray fight.
O, [sit] my husband's wrongs on Herford's spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
Or if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom
That they may break his foaming courser's back,
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
A caitive recreant to my cousin Herford!
Farewell, old Gaunt! thy sometimes brother's wife
With her companion, grief, must end her life. 
Sister, farewell, I must to Coventry.
As much good stay with thee as go with me! 
Yet one word more! Grief boundeth where [it] falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight.
I take my leave before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo this is all -- nay, yet depart not so;
Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
I shall remember more. Bid him -- ah, what? --
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings and unfurnished walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me; let him not come there
To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye. 
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Herford armed? 
Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
Why then the champions are prepared, and stay
For nothing but his Majesty's approach.
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
The cause of his arrival here in arms;
Ask him his name, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.
In God's name and the King's, say who thou art
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
Against what man thou com'st, and what thy quarrel. 
Speak truly on thy knighthood and thy oath,
As so defend thee heaven and thy valor! 
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
Who hither come engaged by my oath
(Which God defend a knight should violate!)
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
To God, my king, and my succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Herford that appeals me,
And by the grace of God, and this mine arm,
To prove him, in defending of myself,
A traitor to my God my king and me --
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally, according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.
What is thy name? and wherefore com'st thou hither
Before King Richard in his royal lists? 
Against whom [com'st] thou? and what's thy quarrel? 
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby
Am I, who ready here do stand in arms
To prove by God's grace, and my body's valor,
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard, and to me --
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
Except the Marshal and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.
Lord Marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand
And bow my knee before his Majesty,
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage.
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And loving farewell of our several friends.
The appellant in all duty greets your Highness, 
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
We will descend and fold him in our arms. 
Cousin of Herford, as thy cause is right, 
So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
Farewell, my blood, which if today thou shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge [thee] dead.
O, let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear.
As confident as is the falcon's flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:
O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
Doth with a twofold vigor lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine armor with thy prayers,
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat, 
And furbish new the name of John a' Gaunt,
Even in the lusty havior of his son. 
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous! 
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Of thy adverse pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.
Mine innocence and Saint George to thrive!
However God or fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
A loyal, just, and upright gentleman.
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage, and embrace
His golden uncontrolled enfranchisement,
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years.
As gentle and as jocund as to jest
Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
Farewell, my lord, securely I espy
Virtue with valor couched in thine eye. 
Order the trial, Marshal, and begin.
Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby, 
Receive thy lance, and God defend the right! 
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
Go bear this lance to Thomas Duke of Norfolk.
Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby
Stands here for God, his sovereign, and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A traitor to his God, his king, and him,
And dares him to set forward to the fight.
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself and to approve
Henry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby
To God, his sovereign, and to him disloyal,
Courageously, and with a free desire,
Attending but the signal to begin.
Sound, trumpets, and set forward, combatants. 
Stay, the King hath thrown his warder down. 
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears, 
And both return back to their chairs again. 
Withdraw with us, and let the trumpets sound
While we return these dukes what we decree.
And list what with our Council we have done: 
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soiled 
With that dear blood which it hath fostered; 
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect 
Of civil wounds ploughed up with neighbors' sword; 
And for we think the eagle-winged pride 
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts, 
With rival-hating envy, set on you 
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle 
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep; 
Which so roused up with boist'rous untuned drums, 
With harsh-resounding trumpets' dreadful bray, 
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms, 
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace, 
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood: 
Therefore we banish you our territories. 
You, cousin Herford, upon pain of life, 
Till twice five summers have enriched our fields 
Shall not regreet our fair dominions, 
But tread the stranger paths of banishment. 
Your will be done. This must my comfort be, 
That sun that warms you here shall shine on me, 
And those his golden beams to you here lent 
Shall point on me and gild my banishment. 
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom, 
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce: 
The sly, slow hours shall not determinate 
The dateless limit of thy dear exile; 
The hopeless word of"never to return" 
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life. 
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege, 
And all unlooked for from your Highness' mouth. 
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim 
As to be cast forth in the common air, 
Have I deserved at your Highness' hands. 
The language I have learnt these forty years, 
My native English, now I must forgo, 
And now my tongue's use is to me no more 
Than an unstringed viol or a harp, 
Or like a cunning instrument cased up, 
Or being open, put into his hands 
That knows no touch to tune the harmony. 
Within my mouth you have enjailed my tongue, 
Doubly portcullised with my teeth and lips, 
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance 
Is made my jailer to attend on me. 
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse, 
Too far in years to be a pupil now. 
What is thy sentence [then] but speechless death, 
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath? 
It boots thee not to be compassionate, 
After our sentence plaining comes too late. 
Then thus I turn me from my country's light, 
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night. 
Return again, and take an oath with thee. 
Lay on our royal sword your banished hands; 
Swear by the duty that y' owe to God 
(Our part therein we banish with yourselves) 
To keep the oath that we administer: 
You never shall, so help you truth and God, 
Embrace each other's love in banishment, 
Nor never look upon each other's face, 
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile 
This low'ring tempest of your home-bred hate, 
Nor never by advised purpose meet 
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill 
'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land. 
Norfolk, so fare as to mine enemy: 
By this time, had the King permitted us, 
One of our souls had wand'red in the air, 
Banished this frail sepulchre of our flesh, 
As now our flesh is banished from this land; 
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm; 
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along 
The clogging burthen of a guilty soul. 
No, Bullingbrook, if ever I were traitor, 
My name be blotted from the book of life, 
And I from heaven banished as from hence! 
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know, 
And all too soon, I fear, the King shall rue. 
Farewell, my liege, now no way can I stray; 
Save back to England, all the world's my way. 
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes 
I see thy grieved heart. Thy sad aspect 
Hath from the number of his banished years 
Plucked four away. Six frozen winters spent, 
Return with welcome home from banishment. 
How lone a time lies in one little word! 
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs 
End in a word: such is the breath of kings. 
I thank my liege that in regard of me 
He shortens four years of my son's exile, 
But little vantage shall I reap thereby,; 
For ere the six years that he hath to spend 
Can change their moons and bring their times about, 
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light 
Shall be extinct with age and endless [night]; 
My inch of taper will be burnt and done, 
And blindfold Death not let me see my son. 
Why, uncle, thou hast many years to live. 
But not a minute, King, that thou canst give. 
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow, 
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow; 
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age, 
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage; 
Thy word is current with him for my death, 
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath. 
Thy son is banished upon good advice, 
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave. 
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to low'r? 
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour. 
You urged me as a judge, but I had rather 
You would have bid me argue like a father. 
O, had't been a stranger, not my child, 
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild. 
A partial slander sought I to avoid, 
And in the sentence my own life destroyed. 
Alas, I looked when some of you should say 
I was too strict to make mine own away; 
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue 
Against my will to do myself this wrong. 
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so. 
Six years we banish him, and he shall go. 
Cousin, farewell! What presence must not know, 
From where you do remain let paper show. 
My lord, no leave take I, for I will ride, 
As far as land will let me, by your side. 
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words, 
That thou returnest no greeting to thy friends? 
I have too few to take my leave of you, 
When the tongue's office should be prodigal 
To breathe the abundant dolor of the heart. 
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time. 
Joy absent, grief is present for that time. 
What is six winters? they are quickly gone. 
To men in joy, but grief makes one hour ten. 
Call it a travel that thou tak'st for pleasure. 
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so, 
Which finds it an enforced pilgrimage. 
The sullen passage of thy weary steps 
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set 
The precious jewel of thy home return. 
Nay rather, every tedious stride I make 
Will but remember me what a deal of world 
I wander from the jewels that I love. 
Must I not serve a long apprenticehood 
To foreign passages, and in the end, 
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else 
But that I was a journeyman to grief? 
All places that the eye of heaven visits 
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens. 
Teach thy necessity to reason thus: 
There is no virtue like necessity. 
Think not the King did banish thee, 
But thou the King. Woe doth the heavier sit 
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne. 
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honor, 
And not the King exiled thee; or suppose 
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air, 
And thou art flying to a fresher clime. 
Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it 
To lie that way thou goest, not whence thou com'st. 
The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strowed, 
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more 
Than a delightful measure or a dance, 
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite 
The man that mocks at it and sets it light. 
O, who can hold a fire in his hand 
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus? 
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite 
By bare imagination of a feast? 
Or wallow naked in December snow 
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat? 
O no, the apprehension of the good 
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse. 
Fell Sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more 
Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore. 
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way; 
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay. 
Then England's ground, farewell, sweet soil, adieu; 
My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet! 
Where e'er I wander, boast of this I can, 
Though banished, yet a true-born Englishman. 
We did observe. Cousin Aumerle, 
How far brought you high Herford on his way? 
I brought high Herford, if you call him so, 
But to the next high way, and there I left him. 
And say, what store of parting tears were shed? 
Faith, none for me, except the northeast wind, 
Which then blew bitterly against our faces, 
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance 
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear. 
What said our cousin when you parted with him? 
And for my heart disdained that my tongue 
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft 
To counterfeit oppression of such grief 
That words seemed buried in my sorrow's grave. 
Marry, would the word "farewell" have length'ned hours 
And added years to his short banishment, 
He should have had a volume of farewells; 
But since it would not, he had none of me. 
He is our cousin's cousin, but 'tis doubt, 
When time shall call him home from banishment, 
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends. 
Ourself and Bushy, [Bagot here and Green,] 
Observed his courtship to the common people, 
How he did seem to dive into their hearts 
With humble and familiar courtesy, 
What reverence he did throw away on slaves, 
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles 
And patient underbearing of his fortune, 
As 'twere to banish their affects with him. 
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench, 
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well, 
And had the tribute of his supple knee, 
With "Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends," 
As were our England in reversion his, 
And he our subjects' next degree in hope. 
Well, he is gone, and with him go these thoughts. 
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, 
Expedient manage must be made, my liege, 
Ere further leisure yield them further means 
For their advantage and your Highness' loss. 
We will ourself in person to this war, 
And for our coffers, with too great a court 
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, 
We are enforced to farm our royal realm, 
The revenue whereof shall furnish us 
For our affairs in hand. If that come short, 
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters, 
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, 
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold, 
And send them after to supply our wants, 
For we will make for Ireland presently.
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
Suddenly taken, and hath sent post-haste
To entreat your majesty to visit him.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind 
To help him to his grave immediately! 
The lining of his coffers shall make coats 
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars. 
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him. 
Pray God we may make haste and come too late! 
Will the King come, that I may breathe my last 
In wholesome counsel to his unstayed youth? 
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath, 
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear. 
O but they say the tongues of dying men 
Enforce attention like deep harmony. 
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, 
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain. 
He that no more must say is listened more 
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose. 
More are men's ends marked than their lives before. 
The setting sun, and music at the close, 
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last, 
Writ in remembrance more than things long past. 
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear, 
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear. 
No, it is stopped with other flattering sounds, 
As praises, of whose taste the wise are [fond], 
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound 
The open ear of youth doth always listen; 
Report of fashions in proud Italy, 
Whose manners still our tardy, apish nation 
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity -- 
So it be new, there's no respect how vile -- 
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears? 
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard, 
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard. 
Direct not him whose way himself will choose, 
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose. 
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired, 
And thus expiring do foretell of him: 
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last, 
For violent fires soon burn out themselves; 
Small show'rs last long, but sudden storms are short; 
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes; 
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder; 
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant, 
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself. 
This royal throne of kings, this sceptred isle, 
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, 
This other Eden, demi-paradise, 
This fortress built by Nature for herself 
Against infection and the hand of war, 
This happy breed of men, this little world, 
This precious stone set in the silver sea, 
Which serves it in the office of a wall, 
Or as [a] moat defensive to a house, 
Against the envy of less happier lands; 
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England, 
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings, 
Feared by their breed, and famous by their birth, 
Renowned for their deeds as far from home, 
For Christian service and true chivalry, 
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry 
Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son; 
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, 
Dear for her reputation through the world, 
Is now leased out -- I die pronouncing it -- 
Like to a tenement or pelting farm. 
England, bound in with the triumphant sea, 
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege 
Of wat'ry Neptune, is now bound in with shame, 
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds; 
That England, that was wont to conquer others, 
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself. 
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, 
How happy then were my ensuing death! 
The King is come. Deal mildly with his youth, 
For young hot colts being raged do rage the more. 
How fares our noble uncle Lancaster? 
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt? 
O how that name befits my composition! 
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old. 
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast; 
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt? 
For sleeping England long time have I watched, 
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt. 
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon 
Is my strict fast -- I mean, my children's looks; 
And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt. 
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave, 
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones. 
Can sick men play so nicely with their names? 
No, misery makes sport to mock itself: 
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, 
I mock my name, great King, to flatter thee. 
Should dying men flatter with those that live? 
No, no, men living flatter those that die. 
Thou, now a-dying, sayest thou flatterest me. 
O no, thou diest, though I the sicker be. 
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill. 
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill, 
Ill in myself to see, and in thee, seeing ill. 
Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land, 
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick, 
And thou, too careless patient as thou art, 
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure 
Of those physicians that first wounded thee. 
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown, 
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head, 
And yet, [incaged] in so small a verge, 
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land. 
O had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye 
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons, 
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame, 
Deposing thee before thou wert possessed, 
Which art possessed now to depose thyself. 
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world, 
It were a shame to let this land by lease; 
But for thy world enjoying but this land, 
Is it not more than shame to shame it so? 
Landlord of England art thou now, not king, 
Thy state of law is bond-slave to the law, 
And thou -- A lunatic lean-witted fool, 
Presuming on an ague's privilege, 
Darest with thy frozen admonition 
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood 
With fury from his native residence. 
Now by my seat's right royal majesty, 
Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son, 
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head 
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders. 
O, spare me not, my [brother] Edward's son, 
For that I was his father Edward's son, 
That blood already, like the pelican, 
Hast thou tapped out and drunkenly caroused. 
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul, 
Whom fair befall in heaven 'mongst happy souls, 
May be a president and witness good 
That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood. 
Join with the present sickness that I have, 
And thy unkindness be like crooked age, 
To crop at once a too long withered flower. 
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee! 
These words hereafter thy tormentors be! 
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave; 
Love they to live that love and honor have. 
And let them die that age and sullens have, 
For both hast thou, and both become the grave. 
I do beseech your Majesty, impute his words 
To wayward sickliness and age in him. 
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear 
As Harry Duke of Herford, were he here. 
Right, you say true: as Herford's love, so his, 
As theirs, so mine, and all be as it is. 
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty. 
What says he? Nay, nothing, all is said. 
His tongue is now a stringless instrument, 
Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent. 
Be York the next that must be bankrout so! 
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe. 
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he; 
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be. 
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars: 
We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns, 
Which live like venom where no venom else 
But only they have privilege to live. 
And, for these great affairs do ask some charge, 
Towards our assistance we do seize to us 
The plate, coin, revenues, and moveables 
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possessed. 
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long 
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong? 
Not Gloucester's death, nor Herford's banishment, 
Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs, 
Nor the prevention of poor Bullingbrook 
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace, 
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek, 
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face. 
I am the last of noble Edward's sons, 
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first. 
In war was never lion raged more fierce, 
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild, 
Than was that young and princely gentleman. 
His face thou hast, for even so looked he, 
Accomplished with [the] number of thy hours; 
But when he frowned it was against the French, 
And not against his friends. His noble hand 
Did win what he did spend, and spent not that 
Which his triumphant father's hand had won. 
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood, 
But bloody with the enemies of his kin. 
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief, 
Or else he never would compare between. 
Why, uncle, what's the matter? O my liege, 
Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased 
Not to be pardoned, am content withal. 
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands 
The royalties and rights of banished Herford? 
Is not Gaunt dead? and doth not Herford live? 
Was not Gaunt just? and is not Harry true? 
Did not the one deserve to have an heir? 
Is not his heir a well-deserving son? 
Take Herford's rights away, and take from Time 
His charters and his customary rights; 
Let not tomorrow then ensue today; 
Be not thyself; for how art thou a king 
But by fair sequence and succession? 
Now afore God -- God forbid I say true! -- 
If you do wrongfully seize Herford's rights, 
Call in the letters-patents that he hath 
By his attorneys-general to sue 
His livery, and deny his off'red homage, 
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head, 
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts, 
And prick my tender patience to those thoughts 
Which honor and allegiance cannot think. 
Think what you will, we seize into our hands 
His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands. 
I'll not be by the while. My liege, farewell! 
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell; 
But by bad courses may be understood 
That their events can never fall out good. 
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight, 
Bid him repair to us to Ely House 
To see this business. tomorrow next 
We will for Ireland, and 'tis time, I trow. 
And we create, in absence of ourself, 
Our uncle York lord governor of England; 
For he is just and always loved us well. 
Come on, our queen, tomorrow must we part. 
Be merry, for our time of stay is short. 
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead. 
And living too, for now his son is Duke. 
Barely in title, not in revenues. 
Richly in both, if justice had her right. 
My heart is great, but it must break with silence, 
Ere't be disburdened with a liberal tongue. 
Nay, speak thy mind, and let him ne'er speak more 
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm! 
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Herford? 
If it be so, out with it boldly, man, 
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him. 
No good at all that I can do for him, 
Unless you call it good to pity him, 
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony. 
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne 
In him, a royal prince, and many moe 
Of noble blood in this declining land. 
The King is not himself, but basely led 
By flatterers, and what they will inform, 
Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all, 
That will the King severely prosecute 
'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs. 
The commons hath he pilled with grievous taxes, 
And quite lost their hearts; the nobles hath he fined 
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts. 
And daily new exactions are devised, 
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what. 
But what a' God's name doth become of this? 
Wars hath not wasted it, for warred he hath not, 
But basely yielded upon compromise 
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars. 
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm. 
The [King's] grown bankrout, like a broken man. 
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him. 
He hath not money for these Irish wars, 
His burthenous taxations notwithstanding, 
But by the robbing of the banished Duke. 
His noble kinsman -- most degenerate king! 
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing, 
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm; 
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails, 
And yet we strike not, but securely perish. 
We see the very wrack that we must suffer, 
And unavoided is the danger now, 
For suffering so the causes of our wrack. 
Not so, even through the hollow eyes of death 
I spy life peering, but I dare not say 
How near the tidings of our comfort is. 
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours. 
Be confident to speak, Northumberland: 
We three are but thyself, and, speaking so, 
Thy words are but as thoughts, therefore be bold. 
Then thus: I have from Le Port Blanc, 
A bay in Britain, received intelligence 
That Harry Duke of Herford, Rainold Lord Cobham, 
[Thomas, son and heir to th' Earl of Arundel,] 
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter, 
His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury, 
Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston, 
All these, well furnished by the Duke of Britain 
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war, 
Are making hither with all due expedience, 
And shortly mean to touch our northern shore. 
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay 
The first departing of the King for Ireland. 
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke, 
Imp out our drooping country's broken wing, 
Redeem from broking pawn the blemished crown, 
Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt, 
And make high majesty look like itself, 
Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh; 
But if you faint, as fearing to do so, 
Stay, and be secret, and myself will go. 
To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear. 
Madam, your Majesty is too much sad. 
You promised, when you parted with the King, 
To lay aside life-harming heaviness 
And entertain a cheerful disposition. 
To please the King I did, to please myself 
I cannot do it; yet I know no cause 
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief, 
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest 
As my sweet Richard. Yet again methinks 
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb, 
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul 
With nothing trembles; at some thing it grieves, 
More than with parting from my lord the King. 
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, 
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so; 
For sorrow's eyes, glazed with blinding tears, 
Divides one thing entire to many objects, 
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon 
Show nothing but confusion; eyed awry 
Distinguish form; so your sweet Majesty, 
Looking awry upon your lord's departure, 
Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail, 
Which, looked on as it is, is nought but shadows 
Of what it is not; then, thrice-gracious Queen, 
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, 
Which for things true weeps things imaginary. 
It may be so; but yet my inward soul 
Persuades me it is otherwise. Howe'er it be, 
I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad, 
As, [though] on thinking on no thought I think, 
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink. 
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady. 
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived 
From some forefather grief; mine is not so, 
For nothing hath begot my something grief, 
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve 
'Tis in reversion that I do possess -- 
But what it is that is not yet known what, 
I cannot name; tis nameless woe, I wot. 
God save your Majesty! and well met, gentlemen. 
I hope the King is not yet shipped for Ireland. 
Why hopest thou so?'Tis better hope he is, 
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope. 
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipped? 
That he, our hope, might have retired his power, 
And driven into despair an enemy's hope, 
Who strongly hath set footing in this land: 
The banished Bullingbrook repeals himself, 
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived 
At Ravenspurgh. Now God in heaven forbid! 
Ah, madam! 'tis too true, and that is worse, 
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Harry Percy, 
The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby, 
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him. 
Why have you not proclaimed Northumberland 
And all the rest revolted faction traitors? 
We have, whereupon the Earl of Worcester 
Hath broken his staff, resigned his stewardship, 
And all the household servants fled with him 
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe, 
And Bullingbrook my sorrow's dismal heir. 
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy, 
And I, a gasping new-delivered mother, 
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow joined. 
Despair not, madam. Who shall hinder me? 
I will despair, and be at enmity 
With cozening hope. He is a flatterer, 
A parasite, a keeper-back of death, 
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life, 
Which false hope lingers in extremity. 
With signs of war about his aged neck. 
O, full of careful business are his looks! 
Uncle, for God's sake speak comfortable words. 
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts. 
Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the earth, 
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares, and grief. 
Your husband, he is gone to save far off, 
Whilst others come to make him lose at home. 
Here am I left to underprop his land, 
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself. 
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made, 
Now shall he try his friends that flattered him. 
My lord, your son was gone before I came. 
He was -- why, so go all which way it will! 
And will, I fear, revolt on Herford's side. 
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship: 
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
An hour before I came, the Duchess died.
God for his mercy, what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once! 
I know not what to do. I would to God 
(So my untruth had not provoked him to it) 
The King had cut off my head with my brother's. 
What, are there no posts dispatched for Ireland? 
How shall we do for money for these wars? 
Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts, 
And bring away the armor that is there. 
Gentlemen, will you go muster men? If I 
Know how or which way to order these affairs 
Thus disorderly thrust into my hands, 
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen: 
T' one is my sovereign, whom both my oath 
And duty bids defend; t' other again 
Is my kinsman, whom the King hath wronged, 
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right. 
Gentlemen, go muster up your men, 
But time will not permit. All is uneven, 
And every thing is left at six and seven. 
The wind sits fair for news to go for Ireland, 
But none returns. For us to levy power 
Proportionable to the enemy 
Besides, our nearness to the King in love 
Is near the hate of those love not the King. 
And that is the wavering commons, for their love 
Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them 
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate. 
Wherein the King stands generally condemned. 
If judgment lie in them, then so do we, 
Because we ever have been near the King. 
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there. 
Thither will I with you, for little office 
Will the hateful commons perform for us, 
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces. 
No, I will to Ireland to his Majesty. 
Farewell! If heart's presages be not vain, 
We three here part that ne'er shall meet again. 
That's as York thrives to beat back Bullingbrook. 
Alas, poor duke, the task he undertakes 
Is numb'ring sands and drinking oceans dry; 
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly. 
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever. 
Well, we may meet again. I fear me, never. 
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now? 
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire. 
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways 
Draws out our miles and makes them wearisome, 
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, 
Making the hard way sweet and delectable. 
But I bethink me what a weary way 
From Ravenspurgh to Cotshall will be found 
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company, 
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled 
The tediousness and process of my travel. 
But theirs is sweet'ned with the hope to have 
The present benefit which I possess, 
And hope to joy is little less in joy 
Than hope enjoyed. By this the weary lords 
Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done 
By sight of what I have, your noble company. 
Of much less value is my company 
Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever. 
I had thought, my lord, to have learned his health of you. 
No, my good lord, he hath forsook the court, 
Broken his staff of office, and dispersed 
The household of the King. What was his reason? 
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor. 
But he my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh 
To offer service to the Duke of Herford, 
And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover 
What power the Duke of York had levied there, 
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh. 
Have you forgot the Duke of [Herford], boy? 
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot 
Which ne'er I did remember. To my knowledge, 
I never in my life did look on him. 
Then learn to know him now, this is the Duke. 
My gracious lord, I tender you my service, 
Such as it is, being tender, raw, and young, 
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm 
To more approved service and desert. 
I thank thee, gentle Percy, and be sure 
I count myself in nothing else so happy 
As in a soul rememb'ring my good friends, 
And as my fortune ripens with thy love, 
It shall be still thy true love's recompense. 
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it. 
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir 
Keeps good old York there with his men of war? 
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, 
Manned with three hundred men, as I have heard, 
None else of name and noble estimate. 
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby, 
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste. 
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues 
A banished traitor. All my treasury 
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enriched 
Shall be your love and labor's recompense. 
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord. 
And far surmounts our labor to attain it. 
Evermore thank's the exchequer of the poor, 
Which, till my infant fortune comes to years, 
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here? 
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess. 
My Lord of Herford, my message is to you. 
My lord, my answer is to Lancaster, 
And I am come to seek that name in England, 
And I must find that title in your tongue, 
Before I make reply to aught you say. 
Mistake me not, my lord, 'tis not my meaning 
To rase one title of your honor out. 
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will, 
From the most gracious regent of this land, 
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on 
To take advantage of the absent time, 
And fright our native peace with self-borne arms. 
I shall not need transport my words by you, 
Here comes his Grace in person. My noble uncle! 
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee, 
Whose duty is deceivable and false. 
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle. 
I am no traitor's uncle, and that word "grace" 
In an ungracious mouth is but profane. 
Why have those banished and forbidden legs 
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground? 
But then more "why?" -- why have they dared to march 
So many miles upon her peaceful bosom, 
Frighting her pale-faced villages with war 
And ostentation of despised arms? 
Com'st thou because the anointed King is hence? 
Why, foolish boy, the King is left behind, 
And in my loyal bosom lies his power. 
Were I but now lord of such hot youth 
As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself 
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men, 
From forth the ranks of many thousand French, 
O then how quickly should this arm of mine, 
Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee, 
And minister correction to thy fault! 
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault, 
On what condition stands it and wherein? 
Even in condition of the worst degree, 
In gross rebellion and detested treason. 
Thou art a banished man, and here art come, 
Before the expiration of thy time, 
In braving arms against thy sovereign. 
As I was banished, I was banished Herford, 
But as I come, I come for Lancaster. 
And, noble uncle, I beseech your Grace 
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye. 
You are my father, for methinks in you 
I see old Gaunt alive. O then, my father, 
Will you permit that I shall stand condemned 
A wandering vagabond, my rights and royalties 
Plucked from my arms perforce -- and given away 
To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born? 
If that my cousin king be King in England, 
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster. 
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin, 
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down, 
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father 
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay. 
I am denied to sue my livery here, 
And yet my letters-patents give me leave. 
My father's goods are all distrained and sold, 
And these, and all, are all amiss employed. 
What would you have me do? I am a subject, 
And I challenge law. Attorneys are denied me, 
And therefore personally I lay my claim 
To my inheritance of free descent. 
The noble Duke hath been too much abused. 
It stands your Grace upon to do him right. 
Base men by his endowments are made great. 
My lords of England, let me tell you this: 
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs, 
And labored all I could to do him right; 
But in this kind to come, in braving arms, 
Be his own carver and cut out his way, 
To find out right with wrong -- it may not be; 
And you that do abet him in this kind 
Cherish rebellion and are rebels all. 
The noble Duke hath sworn his coming is 
But for his own; and for the right of that 
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid; 
And let him never see joy that breaks that oath! 
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms. 
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess, 
Because my power is weak and all ill left; 
But if I could, by Him that gave me life, 
I would attach you all, and make you stoop 
Unto the sovereign mercy of the King; 
But since I cannot, be it known unto you 
I do remain as neuter. So fare you well, 
Unless you please to enter in the castle, 
An offer, uncle, that we will accept, 
But we must win your Grace to go with us 
To Bristow castle, which they say is held 
By Bushy, Bagot, and their complices, 
The caterpillars of the commonwealth, 
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away. 
For I am loath to break our country's laws. 
Nor friends, nor foes, to me welcome you are: 
Things past redress are now with me past care. 
My Lord of Salisbury, we have stayed ten days, 
And hardly kept our countrymen together, 
And yet we hear no tidings from the King, 
Therefore we will disperse ourselves. Farewell! 
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman. 
The King reposeth all his confidence in thee. 
'Tis thought the King is dead; we will not stay. 
The bay-trees in our country are all withered, 
And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven, 
The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth, 
And lean-looked prophets whisper fearful change, 
Rich men look sad, and ruffians dance and leap, 
The one in fear to lose what they enjoy, 
The other to enjoy by rage and war. 
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings. 
Farewell! Our countrymen are gone and fled, 
As well assured Richard their king is dead. 
Ah, Richard! with the eyes of heavy mind 
I see thy glory like a shooting star 
Fall to the base earth from the firmament. 
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, 
Witnessing storms to come, woe, and unrest. 
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, 
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes. 
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls -- 
Since presently your souls must part your bodies -- 
With too much urging your pernicious lives, 
For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood 
From off my hands, here in the view of men 
I will unfold some causes of your deaths: 
You have misled a prince, a royal king, 
A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments, 
By you unhappied and disfigured clean; 
You have in manner with your sinful hours 
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him, 
Broke the possession of a royal bed, 
And stained the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks 
With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs; 
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth, 
Near to the King in blood, and near in love 
Till you did make him misinterpret me, 
Have stooped my neck under your injuries, 
And sighed my English breath in foreign clouds, 
Eating the bitter bread of banishment, 
Whilst you have fed upon my signories, 
Disparked my parks and felled my forest woods, 
From my own windows torn my household coat, 
Rased out my imprese, leaving me no sign, 
Save men's opinions and my living blood, 
To show the world I am a gentleman. 
This and much more, much more than twice all this, 
To execution and the hand of death. 
More welcome is the stroke of death to me 
Than Bullingbrook to England. Lords, farewell! 
My comfort is, that heaven will take our souls, 
And plague injustice with the pains of hell. 
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched. 
Uncle, you say the Queen is at your house, 
For God's sake fairly let her be entreated. 
Tell her I send to her my kind commends; 
Take special care any greetings be delivered. 
A gentleman of mine I have dispatched 
With letters of your love to her at large. 
Thanks, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away, 
To fight with Glendower and his complices. 
A while to work, and after holiday. 
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand? 
Yea, my lord. How brooks your Grace the air 
After your late tossing on the breaking seas? 
Needs must I like it well; I weep for joy 
To stand upon my kingdom once again. 
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand, 
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs. 
As a long-parted mother with her child 
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting, 
So weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth, 
And do thee favors with my royal hands. 
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth, 
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense, 
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom, 
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way, 
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet, 
Which with usurping steps do trample thee. 
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies; 
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, 
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder, 
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch 
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies. 
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords, 
This earth shall have a feeling, and these stones 
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king 
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms. 
Fear not, my lord, that Power that made you king 
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all. 
The means that heavens yield must be embraced, 
And not neglected; else heaven would, 
And we will not. Heaven's offer we refuse, 
The proffered means of succors and redress. 
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss, 
Whilst Bullingbrook, through our security, 
Grows strong and great in substance and in power. 
Discomfortable cousin, know'st thou not 
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid 
Behind the globe, that lights the lower world, 
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen 
In murthers and in outrage [boldly] here, 
But when from under this terrestrial ball 
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines 
And darts his light through every guilty hole, 
Then murthers, treasons, and detested sins, 
The cloak of night being plucked from off their backs, 
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves? 
So when this thief, this traitor Bullingbrook, 
Who all this while hath revelled in the night, 
Whilst we were wand'ring with the antipodes, 
Shall see us rising in our throne, the east, 
His treasons will sit blushing in his face, 
Not able to endure the sight of day, 
But self-affrighted tremble at his sin. 
Not all the water in the rough rude sea 
Can wash the balm off from an anointed king; 
The breath of worldly men cannot depose 
The deputy elected by the Lord; 
For every man that Bullingbrook hath pressed 
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown, 
God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay 
A glorious angel; then if angels fight, 
Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right. 
Welcome, my lord. How far off lies your power? 
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, 
Than this weak arm. Discomfort guides my tongue 
And bids me speak of nothing but despair. 
One day too late, I fear me, noble lord, 
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth. 
O, call back yesterday, bid time return, 
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men! 
today, today, unhappy day, too late, 
Overthrows thy joys, friends, fortune, and thy state, 
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead, 
Are gone to Bullingbrook, dispersed and fled. 
Comfort, my liege, why looks your Grace so pale? 
But now the blood of twenty thousand men 
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled; 
And till so much blood thither come again, 
Have I not reason to look pale and dead? 
All souls that will be safe, fly from my side, 
For time hath set a blot upon my pride. 
Comfort, my liege, remember who you are. 
I had forgot myself, am I not king? 
Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest. 
Is not the king's name twenty thousand names? 
Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes 
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground, 
Ye favorites of a king, are we not high? 
High be our thoughts. I know my uncle York 
More health and happiness betide my liege 
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him! 
Mine ear is open, and my heart prepared, 
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold. 
Say, is my kingdom lost? Why, 'twas my care, 
And what loss is it to be rid of care? 
Strives Bullingbrook to be as great as we? 
Greater he shall not be; if he serve God, 
We'll serve Him too, and be his fellow so. 
Revolt our subjects? That we cannot mend, 
They break their faith to God as well as us. 
Cry woe, destruction, ruin, and decay: 
The worst is death, and death will have his day. 
Glad am I that your Highness is so armed 
To bear the tidings of calamity. 
Like an unseasonable stormy day, 
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, 
As if the world were all dissolved to tears, 
So high above his limits swells the rage 
Of Bullingbrook, covering your fearful land 
With hard bright steel, and hearts harder than steel. 
White-beards have armed their thin and hairless scalps 
Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices, 
Strive to speak big, and clap their female joints 
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown; 
Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows 
Of double-fatal yew against thy state; 
Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills 
Against thy seat: both young and old rebel, 
And all goes worse than I have power to tell. 
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill. 
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? Where is Bagot? 
What is become of Bushy? Where is Green? 
That they have let the dangerous enemy 
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps? 
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it. 
I warrant they have made peace with Bullingbrook. 
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord. 
O villains, vipers, damned without redemption! 
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man! 
Snakes, in my heart-blood warmed, that sting my heart! 
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas! 
Make war upon their spotted souls for this! 
Sweet love, I see, changing his property, 
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate. 
Again uncurse their souls, their peace is made 
With heads, and not with hands. Those whom you curse 
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound, 
And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground. 
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead? 
Ay, all of them at Bristow lost their heads. 
Where is the Duke my father with his power? 
No matter where -- of comfort no man speak: 
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs, 
Make dust our paper, and with rainy eyes 
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth. 
Let's choose executors and talk of wills; 
And yet not so, for what can we bequeath 
Save our deposed bodies to the ground? 
Our lands, our lives, and all are Bullingbrook's, 
And nothing can we call our own but death, 
And that small model of the barren earth 
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones. 
For God's sake let us sit upon the ground 
And tell sad stories of the death of kings: 
How some have been deposed, some slain in war, 
Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed, 
Some poisoned by their wives, some sleeping killed, 
All murthered -- for within the hollow crown 
That rounds the mortal temples of a king 
Keeps Death his court, and there the antic sits, 
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp, 
Allowing him a breath, a little scene, 
To monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks, 
Infusing him with self and vain conceit, 
As if this flesh which walls about our life 
Were brass impregnable; and humored thus, 
Comes at the last and with a little pin 
Bores thorough his castle wall, and farewell king! 
Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood 
With solemn reverence, throw away respect, 
Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty, 
For you have but mistook me all this while. 
How can you say to me I am a king? 
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes, 
But presently prevent the ways to wail; 
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength, 
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, 
And so your follies fight against yourself. 
Fear, and be slain -- no worse can come to fight, 
And fight and die is death destroying death, 
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath. 
My father hath a power, inquire of him, 
And learn to make a body of a limb. 
Thou chid'st me well. Proud Bullingbrook, I come 
To change blows with thee for our day of doom. 
This ague fit of fear is overblown, 
An easy task it is to win our own. 
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power? 
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour. 
Men judge by the complexion of the sky 
The state and inclination of the day; 
So may you by my dull and heavy eye: 
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say. 
I play the torturer by small and small 
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken: 
Your uncle York is joined with Bullingbrook, 
And all your northern castles yielded up, 
And all your southern gentlemen in arms 
Upon his party. Thou hast said enough. 
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth 
Of that sweet way I was in to despair! 
What say you now? What comfort have we now? 
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly 
That bids me be of comfort any more. 
Go to Flint castle, there I'll pine away -- 
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey. 
That power I have, discharge, and let them go 
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow, 
For I have none. Let no man speak again 
To alter this, for counsel is but vain. 
My liege, one word. He does me double wrong 
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue. 
Discharge my followers, let them hence away, 
From Richard's night to Bullingbrook's fair day. 
So that by this intelligence we learn 
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury 
Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed 
With some few private friends upon this coast. 
The news is very fair and good, my lord: 
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head. 
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland 
To say King Richard. Alack the heavy day 
When such a sacred king should hide his head! 
Your Grace mistakes; only to be brief 
Left I his title out. The time hath been, 
Would you have been so brief with him, he would 
Have been so brief [with you] to shorten you, 
For taking so the head, your whole head's length. 
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should. 
Take not, good cousin, further than you should, 
Lest you mistake the heavens are over our heads. 
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself 
Against their will. But who comes here? 
The castle royally is manned, my lord, 
Why, it contains no king. Yes, my good lord, 
It doth contain a king. King Richard lies 
Within the limits of yon lime and stone, 
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman 
Of holy reverence, who, I cannot learn. 
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle. 
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle; 
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley 
Into his ruined ears, and thus deliver: 
On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand, 
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart 
To his most royal person; hither come 
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power, 
Provided that my banishment repealed 
And lands restored again be freely granted. 
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power, 
And lay the summer's dust with show'rs of blood 
Rained from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen, 
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench 
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land, 
My stooping duty tenderly shall show. 
Go signify as much, while here we march 
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain. 
Let's march without the noise of threat'ning drum, 
That from this castle's tottered battlements 
Our fair appointments may be well perused. 
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet 
With no less terror than the elements 
Of fire and water, when their thund'ring shock 
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven. 
Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water; 
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain 
My waters -- on the earth, and not on him. 
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks. 
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear, 
As doth the blushing discontented sun 
From out the fiery portal of the east, 
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent 
To dim his glory and to stain the track 
Of his bright passage to the occident. 
Yet looks he like a king! Behold, his eye, 
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth 
Controlling majesty. Alack, alack for woe, 
That any harm should stain so fair a show! 
We are amazed, and thus long have we stood 
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee, 
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king; 
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget 
To pay their aweful duty to our presence? 
If we be not, show us the hand of God 
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship, 
For well we know no hand of blood and bone 
Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre, 
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp. 
And though you think that all, as you have done, 
Have torn their souls by turning them from us, 
And we are barren and bereft of friends, 
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent, 
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf 
Armies of pestilence, and they shall strike 
Your children yet unborn and unbegot, 
That lift your vassal hands against my head, 
And threat the glory of my precious crown. 
Tell Bullingbrook -- for yon methinks he stands -- 
That every stride he makes upon my land 
Is dangerous treason. He is come to open 
The purple testament of bleeding war; 
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace, 
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons 
Shall ill become the flower of England's face, 
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace 
To scarlet indignation, and bedew 
Her pasters' grass with faithful English blood. 
The King of heaven forbid our lord the King 
Should so with civil and uncivil arms 
Be rushed upon! Thy thrice-noble cousin, 
Harry Bullingbrook, doth humbly kiss thy hand, 
And by the honorable tomb he swears 
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones, 
And by the royalties of both your bloods, 
Currents that spring from one most gracious head, 
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt, 
And by the worth and honor of himself, 
Comprising all that may be sworn or said, 
His coming hither hath no further scope 
Than for his lineal royalties, and to beg 
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees, 
Which on thy royal party granted once, 
His glittering arms he will commend to rust, 
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart 
To faithful service of your Majesty. 
This swears he, as he is [a prince, is] just, 
And as I am a gentleman I credit him. 
Northumberland, say thus the King returns: 
His noble cousin is right welcome hither, 
And all the number of his fair demands 
Shall be accomplished without contradiction. 
With all the gracious utterance thou hast 
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends. 
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not, 
To look so poorly and to speak so fair? 
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send 
Defiance to the traitor, and so die? 
No, good my lord, let's fight with gentle words, 
Till time lend friends, and friends their helpful swords. 
O God, O God, that e'er this tongue of mine 
That laid the sentence of dread banishment 
On yon proud man should take it off again 
With words of sooth! O that I were as great 
As is my grief, or lesser than my name! 
Or that I could forget what I have been! 
Or not remember what I must be now! 
Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat, 
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me. 
Northumberland comes back from Bullingbrook. 
What must the King do now? Must he submit? 
The King shall do it. Must he be deposed? 
The King shall be contented. Must he lose 
The name of king? a' God's name let it go. 
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads, 
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage, 
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown, 
My figured goblets for a dish of wood, 
My sceptre for a palmer's walking-staff, 
My subjects for a pair of carved saints, 
And my large kingdom for a little grave, 
A little little grave, an obscure grave -- 
Or I'll be buried in the king's high way, 
Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet 
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head; 
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live, 
And buried once, why not upon my head? 
Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin! 
We'll make foul weather with despised tears; 
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn, 
And make a dearth in this revolting land. 
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes 
And make some pretty match with shedding tears? 
As thus to drop them still upon one place, 
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves 
Within the earth, and, therein laid -- there lies 
Two kinsmen digged their graves with weeping eyes. 
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see 
I talk but idlely, and you laugh at me. 
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland, 
What says King Bullingbrook? Will his Majesty 
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die? 
You make a leg, and Bullingbrook says ay. 
My lord, in the base court he doth attend 
To speak with you, may it please you to come down. 
Down, down I come, like glist'ring Phaeton, 
Wanting the manage of unruly jades. 
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base, 
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace. 
In the base court, come down? Down court! down king! 
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing. 
What says his Majesty? Sorrow and grief of heart 
Makes him speak fondly like a frantic man, 
And show fair duty to his Majesty. 
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee 
To make the base earth proud with kissing it. 
Me rather had my heart might feel your love 
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy. 
Up, cousin, up, your heart is up, I know, 
Thus high at least although your knee below. 
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own. 
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all. 
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord, 
As my true service shall deserve your love. 
Well you deserve; they well deserve to have 
That know the strong'st and surest way to get. 
Uncle, give me your hands; nay, dry your eyes -- 
Tears show their love, but want their remedies. 
Cousin, I am too young to be your father, 
Though you are old enough to be my heir. 
What you will have, I'll give, and willing too, 
For do we must what force will have us do. 
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so? 
Yea, my good lord. Then I must not say no. 
What sport shall we devise here in this garden 
To drive away the heavy thought of care? 
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs, 
And that my fortune runs against the bias. 
My legs can keep no measure in delight, 
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief; 
Therefore no dancing, girl, some other sport. 
Madam, we'll tell tales. Of sorrow or of [joy]? 
For if of joy, being altogether wanting, 
It doth remember me the more of sorrow; 
Or if of grief, being altogether had, 
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy; 
For what I have I need not to repeat, 
And what I want it boots not to complain. 
Madam, I'll sing. 'Tis well that thou hast cause, 
But thou shouldst please me better wouldst thou weep. 
I could weep, madam, would it do you good. 
And I could sing, would weeping do me good, 
And never borrow any tear of thee. 
Let's step into the shadow of these trees. 
My wretchedness unto a row of [pins], 
They will talk of state, for every one doth so 
Against a change; woe is forerun with woe. 
Go bind thou up young dangling apricocks, 
Which like unruly children make their sire 
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight; 
Give some supportance to the bending twigs. 
Go thou, and like an executioner 
Cut off the heads of [too] fast growing sprays, 
That look too lofty in our commonwealth: 
All must be even in our government. 
You thus employed, I will go root away 
The noisome weeds which without profit suck 
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers. 
Why should we in the compass of a pale 
Keep law and form and due proportion, 
Showing as in a model our firm estate, 
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land, 
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up, 
Her fruit-trees all unpruned, her hedges ruined, 
Her knots disordered, and her wholesome herbs 
Swarming with caterpillars? Hold thy peace. 
He that hath suffered this disordered spring 
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf. 
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter, 
That seemed in eating him to hold him up, 
Are plucked up root and all by Bullingbrook, 
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green. 
What, are they dead? They are; and Bullingbrook 
Hath seized the wasteful King. O, what pity is it 
That he had not so trimmed and dressed his land 
As we this garden! [We] at time of year 
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees, 
Lest being over-proud in sap and blood, 
With too much riches it confound itself; 
Had he done so to great and growing men, 
They might have lived to bear and he to taste 
Their fruits of duty. Superfluous branches 
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live; 
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown, 
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down. 
What, think you the King shall be deposed? 
Depressed he is already, and deposed 
'Tis doubt he will be. Letters came last night 
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's 
O, I am pressed to death through want of speaking! 
Thou old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden, 
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee 
To make a second fall of cursed man? 
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed? 
Dar'st thou, thou little better thing than earth, 
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how, 
[Cam'st] thou by this ill tidings? Speak, thou wretch. 
Pardon me, madam, little joy have I 
To breathe this news, yet what I say is true: 
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold 
Of Bullingbrook; their fortunes both are weighed. 
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself, 
And some few vanities that make him light; 
But in the balance of great Bullingbrook, 
Besides himself, are all the English peers, 
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down. 
Post you to London and you will find it so, 
I speak no more than every one doth know. 
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, 
Doth not thy embassage belong to me, 
And am I last that knows it? O, thou thinkest 
To serve me last that I may longest keep 
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go 
To meet at London London's king in woe. 
What, was I born to this, that my sad look 
Should grace the triumph of great Bullingbrook? 
Gard'ner, for telling me these news of woe, 
Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow. 
Poor queen, so that thy state might be no worse, 
I would my skill were subject to thy curse. 
Here did she fall a tear, here in this place 
I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace. 
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen, 
In the remembrance of a weeping queen. 
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind, 
What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death, 
Who wrought it with the King, and who performed 
The bloody office of his timeless end. 
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle. 
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man. 
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue 
Scorns to unsay what once it hath delivered. 
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted, 
I heard you say,"Is not my arm of length, 
That reacheth from the restful English court 
As far as Callice, to mine uncle's head?" 
Amongst much other talk, that very time, 
I heard you say that you had rather refuse 
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns 
Than Bullingbrook's return to England, 
Adding withal, how blest this land would be 
What answer shall I make to this base man? 
Shall I so much dishonor my fair stars 
On equal terms to give [him] chastisement? 
Either I must, or have mine honor soiled 
With the attainder of his slanderous lips. 
There is my gage, the manual seal of death, 
That marks thee out for hell. I say thou liest, 
And will maintain what thou hast said is false 
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base 
To stain the temper of my knightly sword. 
Bagot, forbear, thou shalt not take it up. 
Excepting one, I would he were the best 
In all this presence that hath moved me so. 
If that thy valure stand on sympathy, 
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine. 
By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st, 
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spak'st it, 
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death. 
If thou deniest it twenty times, thou liest, 
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart, 
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point. 
Thou dar'st not, coward, live to see that day. 
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour. 
Fitzwater, thou art damned to hell for this. 
Aumerle, thou liest, his honor is as true 
In this appeal as thou art all unjust, 
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage, 
To prove it on thee to the extremest point 
Of mortal breathing. Seize it, if thou dar'st. 
And if I do not, may my hands rot off, 
And never brandish more revengeful steel 
Over the glittering helmet of my foe! 
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle, 
And spur thee on with full as many lies 
As may be hollowed in thy treacherous ear 
From [sun] to [sun]. There is my honor's pawn, 
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest. 
Who sets me else? By heaven, I'll throw at all! 
I have a thousand spirits in one breast, 
To answer twenty thousand such as you. 
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well 
The very time Aumerle and you did talk. 
'Tis very true, you were in presence then, 
And you can witness with me this is true. 
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true. 
Surrey, thou liest. Dishonorable boy! 
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword, 
That it shall render vengeance and revenge 
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie 
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull; 
In proof whereof, there is my honor's pawn, 
Engage it to the trial, if thou dar'st. 
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse! 
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live, 
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness, 
And spit upon him whilst I say he lies, 
And lies, and lies. There is [my] bond of faith, 
To tie thee to my strong correction. 
As I intend to thrive in this new world, 
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal; 
Besides, I heard the banished Norfolk say 
That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men 
To execute the noble Duke at Callice. 
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage -- 
That Norfolk lies, here do I throw down this, 
If he may be repealed to try his honor. 
These differences shall all rest under gage 
Till Norfolk be repealed. Repealed he shall be, 
And though mine enemy, restored again 
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial. 
That honorable day shall never be seen. 
Many a time hath banished Norfolk fought 
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field, 
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross 
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens, 
And toiled with works of war, retired himself 
To Italy, and there at Venice gave 
His body to that pleasant country's earth, 
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ, 
Under whose colors he had fought so long. 
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom 
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants, 
Your differences shall all rest under gage 
Till we assign you to your days of trial. 
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee 
From plume-plucked Richard, who with willing soul 
Adopts [thee] heir, and his high sceptre yields 
To the possession of thy royal hand. 
Ascend his throne, descending now from him, 
And long live Henry, fourth of that name! 
In God's name I'll ascend the regal throne. 
Worst in this royal presence may I speak, 
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth. 
Would God that any in this noble presence 
Were enough noble to be upright judge 
Of noble Richard! Then true noblesse would 
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong. 
What subject can give sentence on his king? 
And who sits here that is not Richard's subject? 
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear, 
Although apparent guilt be seen in them, 
And shall the figure of God's majesty, 
His captain, steward, deputy, elect, 
Anointed, crowned, planted many years, 
Be judged by subject and inferior breath, 
And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God, 
That in a Christian climate souls refined 
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed! 
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks, 
Stirred up by God, thus boldly for his king. 
My Lord of Herford here, whom you call king, 
Is a foul traitor to proud Herford's king, 
And if you crown him, let me prophesy, 
The blood of English shall manure the ground, 
And future ages groan for this foul act. 
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels, 
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars 
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound. 
Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny 
Shall here inhabit, and this land be called 
The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls. 
O, if you raise this house against this house, 
It will the woefullest division prove 
That ever fell upon this cursed earth. 
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so, 
Lest child, child's children, cry against you "woe!" 
Well have you argued, sir, and, for your pains, 
Of capital treason we arrest you here. 
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge 
To keep him safely till his day of trial. 
[May it please you, lords, to grant the commons, suit? 
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view 
He may surrender; so we shall proceed 
Without suspicion. I will be his conduct. 
Lords, you that here are under our arrest, 
Procure your sureties for your days of answer. 
Little are we beholding to your love, 
And little looked for at your helping hands. 
Alack, why am I sent for to a king 
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts 
Wherewith I reigned? I hardly yet have learned 
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my knee. 
Give sorrow leave a while to tutor me 
To this submission. Yet I well remember 
The favors of these men. Were they not mine? 
Did they not [sometimes] cry "All hail!" to me? 
So Judas did to Christ; but He, in twelve, 
God save the King! Will no man say amen? 
Am I both priest and clerk? Well then, amen. 
God save the King! although I be not he, 
And yet amen, if heaven do think him me. 
To do what service am I sent for hither? 
To do that office of thine own good will 
Which tired majesty did make thee offer: 
The resignation of thy state and crown 
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown; 
Now is this golden crown like a deep well 
That owes two buckets, filling one another, 
The emptier ever dancing in the air, 
The other down, unseen, and full of water: 
That bucket down and full of tears am I, 
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high. 
I thought you had been willing to resign. 
My crown I am, but still my griefs are mine. 
You may my glories and my state depose, 
But not my griefs; still am I king of those. 
Part of your cares you give me with your crown. 
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down: 
My care is loss of care, by old care done, 
Your care is gain of care, by new care won; 
The cares I give I have, though given away, 
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay. 
Are you contented to resign the crown? 
Ay, no, no ay; for I must nothing be; 
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee. 
Now mark me how I will undo myself: 
I give this heavy weight from off my head, 
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand, 
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart; 
With mine own tears I wash away my balm, 
With mine own hands I give away my crown, 
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state, 
With mine own breath release all duteous oaths; 
All pomp and majesty I do forswear; 
My manors, rents, revenues I forgo; 
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny; 
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me! 
God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee! 
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved, 
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved! 
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit, 
And soon lie Richard in an earthy pit! 
God save King Henry, unkinged Richard says, 
And send him many years of sunshine days! 
What more remains? No more, but that you read 
These accusations, and these grievous crimes 
Committed by your person and your followers 
Against the state and profit of this land; 
That by confessing them, the souls of men 
May deem that you are worthily deposed. 
Must I do so? and must I ravel out 
My weaved-up follies? Gentle Northumberland, 
If thy offenses were upon record, 
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop 
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst, 
There shouldst thou find one heinous article, 
Containing the deposing of a king, 
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath, 
Marked with a blot, damned in the book of heaven. 
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon me 
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself, 
Though some of you, with Pilate, wash your hands, 
Showing an outward pity, yet you Pilates 
Have here delivered me to my sour cross, 
And water cannot wash away your sin. 
My lord, dispatch, read o'er these articles. 
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see; 
And yet salt water blinds them not so much 
But they can see a sort of traitors here. 
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself, 
I find myself a traitor with the rest; 
For I have given here my soul's consent 
T' undeck the pompous body of a king; 
Made glory base, [and] sovereignty a slave; 
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant. 
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man, 
Nor no man's lord. I have no name, no title, 
No, not that name was given me at the font, 
But 'tis usurped. Alack the heavy day, 
That I have worn so many winters out 
And know not now what name to call myself! 
O that I were a mockery king of snow, 
Standing before the sun of Bullingbrook, 
To melt myself away in water-drops! 
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good, 
And if my word be sterling yet in England, 
Let it command a mirror hither straight, 
That it may show me what a face I have 
Since it is bankrout of his majesty. 
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass. 
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come. 
Fiend, thou torments me ere I come to hell! 
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland. 
The commons will not then be satisfied. 
They shall be satisfied. I'll read enough, 
When I do see the very book indeed 
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself. 
Give me that glass, and therein will I read. 
No deeper wrinkles yet? Hath sorrow struck 
So many blows upon this face of mine, 
And made no deeper wounds? O flatt'ring glass, 
Like to my followers in prosperity, 
Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face 
That every day under his household roof 
Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the face 
That like the sun, did make beholders wink? 
Is this the face which faced so many follies, 
That was at last out-faced by Bullingbrook? 
A brittle glory shineth in this face, 
As brittle as the glory is the face, 
For there it is, cracked in an hundred shivers. 
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport, 
How soon my sorrow hath destroyed my face. 
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroyed 
The shadow of your face. Say that again. 
The shadow of my sorrow! Ha, let's see. 
'Tis very true, my grief lies all within, 
And these external [manners] of laments 
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief 
That swells with silence in the tortured soul. 
There lies the substance; and I thank thee, King, 
For thy great bounty, that not only giv'st 
Me cause to wail, but teachest me the way 
How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon, 
And then be gone and trouble you no more. 
Shall I obtain it? Name it, fair cousin. 
"Fair cousin"? I am greater than a king; 
For when I was a king my flatterers 
Were then but subjects; being now a subject, 
I have a king here to my flatterer. 
Being so great, I have no need to beg. 
Whither you will, so I were from your sights. 
Go some of you, convey him to the Tower. 
O, good! convey! Conveyers are you all, 
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall. 
On Wednesday next we solemnly proclaim 
Our coronation. Lords, be ready all. 
A woeful pageant have we here beheld 
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn 
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn. 
You holy clergymen, is there no plot 
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot? 
Before I freely speak my mind herein, 
You shall not only take the sacrament 
To bury mine intents, but also to effect 
What ever I shall happen to devise. 
I see your brows are full of discontent, 
Your hearts of sorrow, and your eyes of tears. 
Come home with me to supper, I'll lay 
A plot shall show us all a merry day. 
This way the King will come, this is the way 
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower, 
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord 
Is doomed a prisoner by proud Bullingbrook. 
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth 
Have any resting for her true king's queen. 
But soft, but see, or rather do not see, 
My fair rose wither; yet look up, behold, 
That you in pity may dissolve to dew 
And wash him fresh again with true-love tears. 
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand, 
Thou map of honor, thou King Richard's tomb, 
And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn, 
Why should hard-favored grief be lodged in thee, 
When triumph is become an alehouse guest? 
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so, 
To make my end too sudden. Learn, good soul, 
To think our former state a happy dream, 
From which awaked, the truth of what we are 
Shows us but this. I am sworn brother, sweet, 
To grim Necessity, and he and I 
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France, 
And cloister thee in some religious house. 
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown, 
Which our profane hours here have thrown down. 
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind 
Transformed and weak'ned? Hath Bullingbrook deposed 
Thine intellect? Hath he been in thy heart? 
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw, 
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage 
To be o'erpow'red, and wilt thou, pupil-like, 
Take the correction, mildly kiss the rod, 
And fawn on rage with base humility, 
Which art a lion and the king of beasts? 
A king of beasts indeed -- if aught but beasts, 
I had been still a happy king of men. 
Good sometimes queen, prepare thee hence for France. 
Think I am dead, and that even here thou takest, 
As from my death-bed, thy last living leave. 
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire 
With good old folks and let them tell [thee] tales 
Of woeful ages long ago betid; 
And ere thou bid good night, to quite their griefs, 
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me, 
And send the hearers weeping to their beds. 
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize 
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue, 
And in compassion weep the fire out, 
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black, 
For the deposing of a rightful king. 
My lord, the mind of Bullingbrook is changed, 
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower. 
And, madam, there is order ta'en for you, 
With all swift speed you must away to France. 
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal 
The mounting Bullingbrook ascends my throne, 
The time shall not be many hours of age 
More than it is, ere foul sin gathering head 
Shall break into corruption. Thou shalt think, 
Though he divide the realm and give thee half, 
It is too little, helping him to all; 
He shall think that thou, which knowest the way 
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again, 
Being ne'er so little urged, another way 
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne. 
The love of wicked men converts to fear, 
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both 
To worthy danger and deserved death. 
My guilt be on my head, and there an end. 
Take leave and part, for you must part forthwith. 
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate 
A twofold marriage -- 'twixt my crown and me, 
And then betwixt me and my married wife. -- 
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me; 
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made. 
Part us, Northumberland: I towards the north, 
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime; 
My wife to France, from whence set forth in pomp 
She came adorned hither like sweet May, 
Sent back like Hollowmas or short'st of day. 
And must we be divided? must we part? 
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart. 
Banish us both, and send the King with me. 
That were some love, but little policy. 
Then whither he goes, thither let me go. 
So two together weeping make one woe. 
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here; 
Better far off than, near, be ne'er the near. 
Go count thy way with sighs, I mine with groans. 
So longest way shall have the longest moans. 
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short, 
And piece the way out with a heavy heart. 
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief, 
Since wedding it, there is such length in grief. 
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part; 
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart. 
Give me mine own again, 'twere no good part 
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart. 
So now I have mine own again, be gone, 
That I may strive to kill it with a groan. 
We make woe wanton with this fond delay, 
Once more, adieu, the rest let sorrow say. 
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest, 
When weeping made you break the story [off,] 
Of our two cousins coming into London. 
Where did I leave? At that sad stop, my lord, 
Where rude misgoverned hands from windows, tops 
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head. 
Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bullingbrook, 
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed, 
Which his aspiring rider seemed to know, 
With slow but stately pace kept on his course, 
Whilst all tongues cried,"God save [thee], Bullingbrook!" 
You would have thought the very windows spake, 
So many greedy looks of young and old 
Through casements darted their desiring eyes 
Upon his visage, and that all the walls 
With painted imagery had said at once, 
"Jesu preserve [thee]! Welcome, Bullingbrook!" 
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning, 
Bare-headed, lower than his proud steed's neck, 
Bespake them thus: "I thank you, countrymen." 
And thus still doing, thus he passed along. 
Alack, poor Richard, where rode he the whilst? 
As in a theatre the eyes of men, 
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage, 
Are idly bent on him that enters next, 
Thinking his prattle to be tedious, 
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes 
Did scowl on gentle Richard. No man cried 
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home, 
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head, 
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off, 
His face still combating with tears and smiles, 
The badges of his grief and patience, 
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steeled 
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted, 
And barbarism itself have pitied him. 
But heaven hath a hand in these events, 
To whose high will we bound our calm contents. 
To Bullingbrook are we sworn subjects now, 
Whose state and honor I for aye allow. 
Here comes my son Aumerle. Aumerle that was, 
But that is lost for being Richard's friend; 
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now. 
I am in parliament pledge for his truth 
And lasting fealty to the new-made king. 
Welcome, my son! Who are the violets now 
That strew the green lap of the new-come spring? 
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not, 
God knows I had as lief be none as one. 
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time, 
Lest you be cropped before you come to prime. 
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom? 
Yea, look'st thou pale? Let me see the writing. 
My lord, 'tis nothing. No matter then who see it. 
I will be satisfied, let me see the writing. 
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me. 
It is a matter of small consequence, 
Which for some reasons I would not have seen. 
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see. 
I fear, I fear -- What should you fear? 
'Tis nothing but some band that he is ent'red into 
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day. 
Bound to himself! What doth he with a bond 
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool. 
I will be satisfied, let me see it, I say. 
Treason, foul treason! Villain, traitor, slave! 
Ho, who is within there? Saddle my horse. 
God for his mercy! what treachery is here! 
Give me my boots, I say, saddle my horse. 
Now by mine honor, by my life, by my troth, 
I will appeach the villain. What is the matter? 
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle? 
Good mother, be content, it is no more 
Than my poor life must answer. Thy life answer? 
Bring me my boots, I will unto the King. 
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed. 
Hence, villain! never more come in my sight. 
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own? 
Have we more sons? or are we like to have? 
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time? 
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age, 
And rob me of a happy mother's name? 
Is he not like thee? is he not thine own? 
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy? 
And interchangeably set down their hands, 
To kill the King at Oxford. He shall be none? 
We'll keep him here, then what is that to him? 
Away, fond woman, were he twenty times my son, 
I would appeach him. Hadst thou groaned for him 
As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful. 
But now I know thy mind, thou dost suspect 
That I have been disloyal to thy bed, 
And that he is a bastard, not thy son. 
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind, 
He is as like thee as a man may be, 
Not like to me, or any of my kin, 
And yet I love him. Make way, unruly woman! 
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse, 
Spur post, and get before him to the King, 
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee. 
I'll not be long behind; though I be old, 
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York. 
An' never will I rise up from the ground 
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son? 
'Tis full three months since I did see him last. 
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he. 
I would to God, my lords, he might be found. 
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there, 
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent, 
With unrestrained loose companions, 
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes 
And beat our watch and rob our passengers, 
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy, 
Takes on the point of honor to support 
My lord, some two days since I saw the Prince, 
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford. 
And what said the gallant? 
His answer was, he would unto the stews, 
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove 
And wear it as a favor, and with that 
He would unhorse the lustiest challenger. 
As dissolute as desperate, yet through both 
May happily bring forth. But who comes here? 
What means our cousin, that he stares and looks 
To have some conference with your Grace alone. 
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone. 
What is the matter with our cousin now? 
For ever may my knees grow to the earth, 
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth, 
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak. 
Intended, or committed, was this fault? 
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be, 
To win thy after-love I pardon thee. 
Then give me leave that [I] may turn the key, 
That no man enter till my tale be done. 
Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there. 
Open the door, secure foolhardy King! 
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face? 
Open the door, or I will break it open. 
What is the matter, uncle? Speak, 
Recover breath, tell us how near is danger 
That we may arm us to encounter it. 
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know 
The treason that my haste forbids me show. 
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise passed. 
I do repent me, read not my name there, 
My heart is not confederate with my hand. 
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down. 
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, King; 
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence. 
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove 
A serpent that will sting thee to the heart. 
O heinous, strong, and bold conspiracy! 
O loyal father of a treacherous son! 
Thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain, 
From whence this stream through muddy passages 
Hath held his current and defiled himself! 
Thy overflow of good converts to bad, 
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse 
This deadly blot in thy digressing son. 
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd, 
An' he shall spend mine honor with his shame, 
As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold. 
Mine honor lives when his dishonor dies, 
Or my shamed life in his dishonor lies: 
Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath, 
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death. 
What ho, my liege! for God's sake let me in. 
What shrill[-voiced] suppliant makes this eager cry? 
A woman, and thy aunt, great King, 'tis I. 
Speak with me, pity me, open the door! 
A beggar begs that never begged before. 
Our scene is alt'red from a serious thing, 
And now changed to"The Beggar and the King." 
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in, 
I know she is come to pray for your foul sin. 
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray, 
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may. 
This fest'red joint cut off, the rest rest sound, 
This let alone will all the rest confound. 
O King, believe not this hard-hearted man! 
Love loving not itself, none other can. 
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here? 
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear? 
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege. 
Rise up, good aunt. Not yet, I thee beseech. 
For ever will I walk upon my knees, 
And never see day that the happy sees, 
Till thou give joy, until thou bid me joy 
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy. 
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee. 
Against them both my true joints bended be. 
Ill mayst thou thrive if thou grant any 
Pleads he in earnest? Look upon his face: 
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest, 
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast; 
He prays but faintly, and would be denied, 
We pray with heart and soul, and all beside; 
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know, 
Our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow; 
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy, 
Ours of true zeal and deep integrity; 
Our prayers do outpray his, then let them have 
That mercy which true prayer ought to have. 
Good aunt, stand up. Nay, do not say "stand up"; 
Say"pardon" first, and afterwards "stand up." 
And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, 
"Pardon" should be the first word of thy speech. 
I never longed to hear a word till now, 
Say "pardon," King, let pity teach thee how. 
The word is short, but not so short as sweet, 
No word like"pardon" for kings' mouths so meet. 
Speak it in French, King, say "pardonne moy." 
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy? 
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord, 
That sets the word itself against the word! 
Speak "pardon" as 'tis current in our land, 
The chopping French we do not understand. 
Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there; 
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear, 
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce, 
Pity may move thee"pardon" to rehearse. 
Good aunt, stand up. I do not sue to stand; 
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand. 
I pardon him as God shall pardon me. 
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee! 
Yet am I sick for fear, speak it again, 
Twice saying"pardon" doth not pardon twain, 
But makes one pardon strong. With all my heart 
I pardon him. A god on earth thou art. 
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, 
With all the rest of that consorted crew, 
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels. 
Good uncle, help to order several powers 
To Oxford, or where e'er these traitors are. 
They shall not live within this world, I swear, 
But I will have them if I once know where. 
Uncle, farewell, and, cousin, adieu! 
Your mother well hath prayed, and prove you true. 
Come, my old son, I pray God make thee new. 
Didst thou not mark the King, what words he spake? 
"Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?" 
Was it not so? These were his very words. 
"Have I no friend?" quoth he. He spake it twice, 
And urged it twice together, did he not? 
He did. And speaking it, he wishtly looked on me 
As who should say,"I would thou wert the man 
That would divorce this terror from my heart" -- 
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come let's go. 
I am the King's friend, and will rid his foe. 
I have been studying how I may compare 
This prison where I live unto the world; 
And for because the world is populous, 
And here is not a creature but myself, 
I cannot do it; yet I'll hammer it out. 
My brain I'll prove the female to my soul, 
My soul the father, and these two beget 
A generation of still-breeding thoughts; 
And these same thoughts people this little world, 
In humors like the people of this world: 
For no thought is contented. The better sort, 
As thoughts of things divine, are intermixed 
With scruples and do set the word itself 
As thus: "Come, little ones," and then again, 
"It is as hard to come as for a camel 
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye." 
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot 
Unlikely wonders: how these vain weak nails 
May tear a passage thorough the flinty ribs 
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls; 
And for they cannot, die in their own pride. 
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves 
That they are not the first of fortune's slaves, 
Nor shall not be the last -- like seely beggars 
Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame, 
That many have and others must [sit] there; 
And in this thought they find a kind of ease, 
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back 
Of such as have before endured the like. 
Thus play I in one person many people, 
And none contented. Sometimes am I king; 
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar, 
And so I am. Then crushing penury 
Persuades me I was better when a king; 
Then am I kinged again, and by and by 
Think that I am unkinged by Bullingbrook, 
And straight am nothing. But what e'er I be, 
Nor I, nor any man that but man is, 
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased 
With being nothing. ) Music do I hear? 
Ha, ha, keep time! How sour sweet music is 
When time is broke, and no proportion kept! 
So is it in the music of men's lives. 
And here have I the daintiness of ear 
To check time broke in a disordered string; 
But for the concord of my state and time 
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke. 
I wasted time, and now doth time waste me; 
For now hath time made me his numb'ring clock: 
My thoughts are minutes, and with sighs they jar 
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch, 
Whereto my finger, like a dial's point, 
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears. 
Now, sir, the sound that tells what hour it is 
Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart, 
Which is the bell. So sighs, and tears, and groans 
Show minutes, times, and hours; but my time 
Runs posting on in Bullingbrook's proud joy, 
While I stand fooling here, his Jack of the clock. 
This music mads me, let it sound no more, 
For though it have holp mad men to their wits, 
In me it seems it will make wise men mad. 
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me! 
For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard 
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world. 
Hail, royal prince! Thanks, noble peer! 
The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear. 
What art thou? and how comest thou hither, 
Where no man never comes, but that sad dog 
That brings me food to make misfortune live? 
I was a poor groom of thy stable, King, 
When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York, 
With much ado (at length) have gotten leave 
To look upon my sometimes royal master's face. 
O how it erned my heart when I beheld 
In London streets, that coronation-day, 
When Bullingbrook rode on roan Barbary, 
That horse that thou so often hast bestrid, 
That horse that I so carefully have dressed! 
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend, 
So proudly as if he disdained the ground. 
So proud that Bullingbrook was on his back! 
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand, 
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him. 
Would he not stumble? Would he not fall down, 
Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck 
Of that proud man that did usurp his back? 
Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee, 
Since thou, created to be awed by man, 
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse, 
And yet I bear a burthen like an ass, 
Spurred, galled, and tired by jauncing Bullingbrook. 
Fellow, give place, here is no longer stay. 
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away. 
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say. 
My lord, will't please you to fall to? 
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do. 
My lord, I dare not. Sir Pierce of Exton, who 
Lately came from the King, commands the contrary. 
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee! 
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it. 
How now, what means death in this rude assault? 
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument, 
Go thou and fill another room in hell. 
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire 
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand 
Hath with the King's blood stained the King's own land. 
Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high, 
Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die. 
As full of valure as of royal blood! 
Both have I spilled; O would the deed were good! 
For now the devil that told me I did well 
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell. 
This dead king to the living king I'll bear; 
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here. 
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear 
Is that the rebels have consumed with fire 
Our town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire, 
But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not. 
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness. 
The next news is, I have to London sent 
The heads of Salisbury, [Spencer], Blunt, and Kent. 
The manner of their taking may appear 
At large discoursed in this paper here. 
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains, 
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains. 
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London 
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely, 
Two of the dangerous consorted traitors 
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow. 
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot, 
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot. 
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster, 
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy 
Hath yielded up his body to the grave; 
But here is Carlisle living, to abide 
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride. 
Choose out some secret place, some reverent room, 
More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life. 
So as thou liv'st in peace, die free from strife, 
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been, 
High sparks of honor in thee have I seen. 
Great King, within this coffin I present 
Thy buried fear. Herein all breathless lies 
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies, 
Richard of Burdeaux, by me hither brought. 
Exton, I thank thee not, for thou hast wrought 
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand 
Upon my head and all this famous land. 
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed. 
They love not poison that do poison need, 
Nor do I thee. Though I did wish him dead, 
I hate the murtherer, love him murthered. 
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labor, 
But neither my good word nor princely favor. 
With Cain go wander thorough shades of night, 
And never show thy head by day nor light. 
Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe 
That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow. 
Come mourn with me for what I do lament, 
And put on sullen black incontinent. 
I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land, 
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand. 
March sadly after, grace my mournings here, 
In weeping after this untimely bier.
<SHRVS> You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds
(Brach Merriman, the poor cur, is embossed),
And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss,
And twice today picked out the dullest scent.
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
Thou art a fool; if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well, and look unto them all,
tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
What's here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
He breathes, my lord.  Were he not warmed with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly. 
O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! 
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were conveyed to bed,
Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up, and manage well the jest.
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber,
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet.
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound; 
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight,
And with a low submissive reverence 
Say,"What is it your honor will command?" 
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say, "Will't please your lordship cool your hands?"
Some one be ready with a costly suit,
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease.
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs;
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.
Take him up gently and to bed with him, 
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds. 
Belike some noble gentleman that means
(Travelling some journey) to repose him here.
How now? who is it? An't please your honor, players
Bid them come near. Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
So please your lordship to accept our duty.
With all my heart. This fellow I remember
Since once he played a farmer's eldest son.
'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well.
I have forgot your name; but sure that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally performed. 
I think 'twas Soto that your honor means. 
'Tis very true; thou didst it excellent. 
Well, you are come to me in happy time,
The rather for I have some sport in hand,
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play tonight;
But I am doubtful of your modesties,
Lest, over-eyeing of his odd behavior
(For yet his honor never heard a play),
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves, 
Were he the veriest antic in the world.
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one.
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
And see him dressed in all suits like a lady;
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber, 
And call him madam, do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love, 
He bear himself with honorable action, 
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished;
Such duty to the drunkard let him do,
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say,"What is't your honor will command,
Wherein your lady, and your humble wife,
May show her duty and make known her love?"
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteemed him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a napkin (being close conveyed)
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst;
I know the boy will well usurp the grace 
Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewomen 
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen,
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.
Will't please your [lordship] drink a cup of sack?
Will't please your honor taste of these conserves?
What raiment will your honor wear today?
Heaven cease this idle humor in your honor!
O that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions, and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn! 
O, this is it that makes your servants droop! 
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O  noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? Hark, Apollo plays,   
And twenty caged nightingales do sing.
Or wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a couch,
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk; we will bestrow the ground.
Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark.  Or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
Say thou wilt course, thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags; ay, fleeter than the roe.
Dost thou love pictures?  We will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook, 
And Cytherea all in sedges hid, 
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord.
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'errun her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world,
And yet she is inferior to none.
Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream?  Or have I dreamed till now? 
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savors, and I feel soft things. 
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed, 
And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,
And once again a pot o' th' smallest ale.
Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
O how we joy to see your wit restored!
O that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream,
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap,
But did I never speak of all that time?
O yes, my lord, but very idle words,
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door,
And rail upon the hostess of the house,
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts.
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckoned up, 
As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greece, 
And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernell,
And twenty more such names and men as these,
Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends! 
Amen. I thank thee, thou shalt not lose by it.
Marry, I fare well, for here is cheer enough.
Here, noble lord, what is thy will with her?
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me "lord"; I am your goodman.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband, 
I am your wife in all obedience.
I know it well.  What must I call her? Madam.
Madam, and nothing else, so lords call ladies. 
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamed, 
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.
Thrice-noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two;
Or if not so, until the sun be set.
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed.
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
Your honor's players, hearing your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy, 
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood, 
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy. 
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play,
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
What, household stuff? It is a kind of history.
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy, 
And by my father's love and leave am armed
With his good will and thy good company, 
My trusty servant, well approved in all, 
Here let us breathe, and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii;
Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence,
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds.
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,
And with saciety seeks to quench his thirst.
I am, in all affected as yourself,
Glad that you thus continue your resolve 
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire 
This virtue and this moral discipline, 
Let's be no Stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
Or so devote to Aristotle's checks
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
And practice rhetoric in your common talk,
Music and poesy use to quicken you,
The mathematics, and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you:
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while, what company is this?
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther, 
For how I firmly am resolved you know: 
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder.
If either of you both love Katherina,
Because I know you well, and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
To cart her rather; she's too rough for me.
There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
Mates, maid, how mean you that? No mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear.
Iwis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool,
And paint your face, and use you like a fool.
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
Husht, master, here's some good pastime toward;
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward. 
But in the other's silence do I see 
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Well said, master, mum, and gaze your fill.
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca, get you in,
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
Put finger in the eye, and she knew why.
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe;
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look and practice by myself.
Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak.
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief. Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell, 
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved. 
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments, and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth.  If you, Hortensio,
Or, Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing-up,
And so farewell.  Katherina, you may stay,
For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not?
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely.
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness, 
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear 
As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was: 
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Master, it is no time to chide you now,
Affection is not rated from the heart.
If love have touched you, nought remains but so,
Gramercies, lad. Go forward, this contents;
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
Master, you looked so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all.
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strond.
Saw you no more?  Marked you not how her sister 
Began to scold, and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din? 
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,
And with her breath she did perfume the air. 
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her. 
Nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir; if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home,
And therefore has he closely mewed her up,
Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted.
I have it, Tranio. Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Tell me thine first. You will be schoolmaster,
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device. It is; may it be done? 
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son, 
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, 
Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we be distinguished by our faces
For man or master. Then it follows thus:
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead;
Keep house and port and servants, as I should.
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colored hat and cloak.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient --
For so your father charged me at our parting;
"Be serviceable to my son," quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense --
I am content to be Lucentio, 
Because so well I love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves, 
And let me be a slave, t' achieve that maid 
Whose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
Sirrah, come hither,'tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my count'nance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I killed a man, and fear I was descried.
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life.
You understand me? Ay, sir! --  ne'er a whit.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth, 
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
The better for him, would I were so too! 
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
When I am alone, why then I am Tranio;
But in all places else [your] master Lucentio.
One thing more rests, that thyself execute --
To make one among these wooers.  If thou ask me why,
Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
My lord, you nod, you do not mind the play.
Verona, for a while I take my leave
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here,  sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate,
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Faith, sirrah, and you'll not knock, I'll ring it.
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it. 
Help, [masters], help, my master is mad.
Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Con tutto il core, ben trovato,  may I say.
Rise, Grumio, rise, we will compound this quarrel.
Whom would to God I had well knocked at first,
Then had not Grumio come by the worst. 
A senseless villain!  Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate, 
And could not get him for my heart to do it. 
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience, I am Grumio's pledge.
Why, this' a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Such wind as scatters young men through the world 
To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
Where small experience grows.  But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased,
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Happily to wive and thrive as best I may.
Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home, 
And so am come abroad to see the world.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee, 
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favored wife? 
Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel;
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich,
And very rich. But th' art too much my friend,
Signior Hortensio,'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife
(As wealth is burthen of my wooing dance),
Be she as foul as was Florentius, love,
As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrowd
As Socrates' Xantippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes at least
Affection's edge in me.  [Whe'er] she is as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas,
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in, 
I will continue that I broached in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman.
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrowd and froward, so beyond all measure, 
That were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold. 
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect.
Tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman.
Her name is Katherina Minola,
Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
I know her father, though I know not her,
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her,
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is.
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,
And her withholds from me [and] other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love;
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katherina will be wooed.
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,
That so I may by this device at least 
Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
And unsuspected court her by herself. 
Peace, Grumio, it is the rival of my love.
A proper stripling, and an amorous!
O, very well, I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir, I'll have them very fairly bound --
All books of love, see that at any hand --
And see you read no other lectures to her.
You understand me. Over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed;
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to.  What will you read to her?
What e'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured, 
As firmly as yourself were still in place,
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words 
Than you -- unless you were a scholar, sir. 
O this learning, what a thing it is!
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
Grumio, mum!  God save you, Signior Gremio.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man; for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help [me] to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love;
Listen to me, and if you speak me for, 
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either. 
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katherine,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
I know she is an irksome brawling scold.
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
No, say'st me so, friend?  What countryman?
Born in Verona, old [Antonio's] son.
My father dead, my fortune lives for me,
And I do hope good days and long to see.
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange;
But if you have a stomach, to't a' God's name;
You shall have me assisting you in all.
Will he woo her? ay -- or I'll hang her.
Why came I hither but to that intent? 
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar? 
Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds, 
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ord'nance in the field,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush, fear boys with bugs. For he fears none.
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and [ours].
I promised we would be contributors,
And bear his charge of wooing,  whatsoe'er.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way 
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
He that has the two fair daughters? is't he you mean? 
Perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
Well begun, Tranio. Sir, a word ere you go.
And if I be, sir, is it any offense?
No; if without more words you will get you hence.
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you? But so is not she.
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
Softly, my masters! If you be gentlemen, 
Baptista is a noble gentleman, 
To whom my father is not all unknown, 
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers,
Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
And so she shall.  Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
What, this gentleman will out-talk us all.
Sir, give him head, I know he'll prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?
No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two:
The one as famous for a scolding tongue,
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first's for me, let her go by.
Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
Her father keeps from all access of suitors, 
And will not promise her to any man,
Until the elder sister first be wed. 
The younger then is free, and not before. 
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
And if you break the ice, and do this [feat],
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access -- whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive,
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
O excellent motion!  Fellows, let's be gone.
The motion's good indeed, and be it so,
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself, 
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me --
That I disdain; but for these other [gawds],
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat,
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
Of all thy suitors here I charge [thee] tell
Whom thou lov'st best; see thou dissemble not.
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
O then belike you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while.
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands. 
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Why, how now, dame, whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl, she weeps. 
Go ply thy needle, meddle not with her.
For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit, 
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? 
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.
What, in my sight?  Bianca, get thee in.
What, will you not suffer me?  Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance barefoot on her wedding-day,
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me, I will go sit and weep,
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here? Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.
Good morrow, neighbor Gremio.  God save 
And you, good sir!  Pray have you not a daughter 
Called Katherina, fair and virtuous?
I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.
You are too blunt, go to it orderly.
You wrong me, Signior Gremio, give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant.
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong.
His name is Litio, born in Mantua.
Y' are welcome, sir, and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katherine, this I know, 
She is not for your turn, the more my grief. 
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.
Mistake me not, I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.
I know him well; you are welcome for his sake. 
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray
Let us that are poor petitioners speak too.
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
And free access and favor as the rest;
And toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Lucentio is your name, of whence, I pray?
Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio. 
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well. You are very welcome, sir. 
Take you the lute, and you the set of books. 
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within! Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner.  You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left soly heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have bettered rather than decreased.
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
After my death, the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns. 
And for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me, 
In all my lands and leases whatsoever. 
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtained,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.
Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together,
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all;
So I to her, and so she yields to me,
For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
That [shake] not, though they blow perpetually.
How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale? 
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician? 
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Why then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Why no, for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bowed her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
"Frets, call you these?" quoth she, "I'll fume with them."
And with that word she strook me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way,
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute,
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling jack, with twenty such vild terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.
Now by the world, it is a lusty wench!
I love her ten times more than e'er I did.
O, how I long to have some chat with her!
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited.
Proceed in practice with my younger daughter; 
She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us, 
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you? 
I pray you do. I'll attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail, why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale;
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly washed with dew;
Say she be mute, and will not speak a word,
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence;
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week;
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banes, and when be married.
But here she comes, and now, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate, for that's your name, I hear.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.:
They call me Katherine that do talk of me. 
You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate, 
And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate-Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation --
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Moved! in good time!  Let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence. I knew you at the first
Why, what's a moveable? A joined-stool.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
Alas, good Kate, I will not burthen thee, 
For knowing thee to be but young and light.
Too light for such a swain as you to catch, 
And yet as heavy as my weight should be. 
O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come, you wasp, i' faith you are too angry.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?
Yours, if you talk of tales, and so farewell.
What, with my tongue in your tail?  Nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman -- That I'll try.  
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.
If you strike me, you are no gentleman, 
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
A herald, Kate?  O, put me in thy books!
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
No cock of mine, you crow too like a craven.
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
It is my fashion when I see a crab.
Why, here's no crab, and therefore look not sour. 
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
Yet you are withered. 'Tis with cares. I care not.
Nay, hear you, Kate. In sooth you scape not so. 
I chafe you if I tarry. Let me go.
No, not a whit, I find you passing gentle:
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers.
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askaunce,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk;
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft, and affable. 
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O sland'rous world!  Kate like the hazel-twig 
Is straight and slender, and as brown in hue 
As hazel-nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk. Thou dost not halt.
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,
And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful!
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.
A witty mother! witless else her son.
Am I not wise? Yes, keep you warm.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed;
And therefore setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on;
And will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,
For by this light whereby I see thy beauty, 
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me; 
For I am he am born to tame you, Kate, 
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father. Never make denial;
I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
Call you me daughter?  Now I promise you
You have showed a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic,
A madcap ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talked of her, have talked amiss of her.
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove; 
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn:
For patience she will prove a second Grissel, 
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity; 
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
Is this your speeding? Nay then good night our part! 
Be patient, gentlemen, I choose her for myself.
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
'Tis bargained 'twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you 'tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate,
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate, I will unto Venice 
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests, 
I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine. 
I know not what to say, but give me your hands.
God send you joy, Petruchio, 'tis a match.
Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
I will to Venice, Sunday comes apace.
We will have rings and things, and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married a' Sunday.
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
The gain I seek is, quiet [in] the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter;
Now is the day we long have looked for.
I am your neighbor, and was suitor first. 
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess. 
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I. 
Greybeard, thy love doth freeze. But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back,'tis age that nourisheth.
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
Content you, gentlemen, I will compound this strife.
'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,
Valens of Venice gold in needle-work;
Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs 
To house or house-keeping. Then at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, 
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls, 
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am strook in years, I must confess,
And if I die tomorrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
That "only" came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son.
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointer.
What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all. --
That she shall have, besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marsellis road.
What,  have I choked you with an argosy?
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
And twelve tight galleys.  These I will assure her,
And twice as much, what e'er thou off'rest next. 
Nay, I have off'red all, I have no more, 
And she can have no more than all I have;
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
Why then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise; Gremio is outvied.
I must confess your offer is the best,
And let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own, else you must pardon me;
If you should die before him, where's her dower?
That's but a cavil; he is old, I young.
And may not young men die as well as old?
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katherine is to be married.
Now on the Sunday following shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you make this assurance;
And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
Adieu, good neighbor. Now I fear thee not.
Sirrah, young gamester, your father were a fool 
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy! 
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good.
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, called supposed Vincentio;
And that's a wonder. Fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
Fiddler, forbear, you grow too forward, sir.
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katherine welcomed you withal?
The patroness of heavenly harmony.
Then give me leave to have prerogative,
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much. 
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordained! 
Was it not to refresh the mind of man 
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
I am no breeching scholar in the schools,
I'll not be tied to hours, nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles,
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
That will be never, tune your instrument.
"Hic ibat Simois; his est [Sigeia] tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis."
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Now let me see if I can conster it: 
Madam,'tis now in tune. All but the base.
The base is right,'tis the base knave that jars.
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides
Was Ajax, called so from his grandfather.
I must believe my master, else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt.
But let it rest. Now, Litio, to you:
Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
You may go walk, and give me leave a while; 
My lessons make no music in three parts.
Are you so formal, sir?  Well, I must wait, 
And watch withal, for but I be deceived, 
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art,
To teach you gamouth in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade;
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamouth long ago.
Yet read the gamouth of Hortensio.
Gamouth, I am, the ground of all accord:
A re, to plead Hortensio's passion;
B mi, Bianca, take him for thy lord,
C fa ut, that loves with all affection.
D sol re, one cliff, two notes have I,
E la mi, show pity, or I die."
Call you this gamouth?  Tut, I like it not.
Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice
To [change] true rules for [odd] inventions. 
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books, 
And help to dress your sister's chamber up.
You know tomorrow is the wedding-day.
Farewell, sweet masters both, I must be gone.
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant.
Methinks he looks as though he were in love;
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list. If once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day,
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law. 
What will be said? What mockery will it be,
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends 
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage? 
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
No shame but mine.  I must forsooth be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen,
Who wooed in haste, and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,;
And to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banes,
Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed.
Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
And say,"Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her!"
Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word.
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest. 
Would Katherine had never seen him though! 
Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of [thy] impatient humor.
Is it new and old too? how may that be?
Why, is it not news to [hear] of Petruchio's coming?
Is he come? Why, no, sir. What then?
He is coming. When will he be here?
When he stands where I am, and sees you there. 
'Tis some odd humor pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean apparelled.
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
Why, sir, he comes not. Didst thou not say he comes?
Who? that Petruchio came? Ay, that Petruchio came.
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Why, that's all one. Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny, A horse and a man
Come, where be these gallants?  Who's at home?
You are welcome, sir.  And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.  Not so well apparelled 
Were it better I should rush in thus:
But where is Kate?  Where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? -- Gentles, methinks you frown,
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.
First were we sad, fearing you would not come,
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
And tell us what occasion of import
Hath all so long detained you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear --
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress,
Which at more leisure I will so excuse 
As you shall well be satisfied with all.
But where is Kate?  I stay too long from her. 
The morning wears,'tis time we were at church. 
See not your bride in these unreverent robes,
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Not I, believe me, thus I'll visit her.
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words;
To me she's married, not unto my clothes.
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate, and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.
I'll after him, and see the event of this.
But, sir, love concerneth us to add 
Her father's liking, which to bring to pass,
As before imparted to your worship, 
I am to get a man -- what e'er he be, 
It skills not much, we'll fit him to our turn --
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
Which once performed, let all the world say no,
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world.
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business.
We'll overreach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Litio,
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
As willingly as e'er I came from school. 
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home? 
A bridegroom, say you? 'tis a groom indeed, 
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
Curster than she? why,'tis impossible.
Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
"Ay, by gogs-wouns," quoth he, and swore so loud,
That all amazed the priest let fall the book,
And as he stooped again to take it up,
This mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff 
That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.
"Now take them up," quoth he,"if any list." 
What said the wench when he rose again? 
Trembled and shook; for why, he stamped and swore
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine.  "A health!" quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm, quaffed off the muscadel,
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly,
And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck,
And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo.
And I seeing this, came thence for very shame,
And after me I know the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before.
Hark, hark, I hear the minstrels play.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains. 
I know you think to dine with me today, 
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer,
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
Is't possible you will away tonight?
I must away today, before night come.
Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
Dine with my father, drink a health to me,
For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
I am content. Are you content to stay?
I am content you shall entreat me stay, 
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Now if you love me stay.  Grumio, my horse. 
Do what thou canst, I will not go today,
No, nor tomorrow -- not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir, there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself.
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.
O Kate, content thee, prithee be not angry.
I will be angry; what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet, he shall stay my leisure.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her.
Go to the feast, revel and domineer, 
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves; 
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me. 
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret,
I will be master of what is mine own.
She is my goods, my chattels, she is my house,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare,
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua.  Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate!
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
Of all mad matches never was the like.
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
That being mad herself, she's madly mated. 
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
Neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants 
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place,
And let Bianca take her sister's room.
Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?
She shall, Lucentio.  Come, gentlemen, let's go.
Where be these knaves?  What, no man at door 
To hold my stirrup, nor to take my horse?
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip? 
You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms! 
What?  no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.
You peasant swain, you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabr'el's pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel;
There was no link to color Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
There were none fine but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory; 
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly,
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you. 
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in. 
"Where is the life that late I led? Where are those" --
Sit down, Kate, and welcome. Soud, soud, soud, soud!
Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues!  You villains, when?
Out, you rogue, you pluck my foot awry.
Take that, and mend the plucking [off] the other.
Be merry, Kate.  Some water here; what ho!
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither;
Where are my slippers?  Shall I have some water?
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily. 
You whoreson villain, will you let it fall?
Patience, I pray you, 'twas a fault unwilling. 
A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!
Come, Kate, sit down, I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
What's this?  Mutton? Ay. Who brought it? I.
What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all.
You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves!
What, do you grumble?  I'll be with you straight.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet.
The meat was well, if you were so contented.
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away, 
And I expressly am forbid to touch it;
For it engenders choler, planteth anger, 
And better 'twere that both of us did fast, 
Since of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such overroasted flesh.
Be patient, tomorrow 't shall be mended,
And for this night we'll fast for company.
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new risen from a dream.
Away, away, for he is coming hither.
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully. 
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,
And till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged, 
For then she never looks upon her lure. 
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come, and know her keeper's call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat today, nor none shall eat;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll find about the making of the bed,
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her,
And in conclusion, she shall watch all night,
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl,
And with the clamor keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humor.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak; 'tis charity to shew.
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
What, master, read you?  First resolve me that.
I read that I profess, the Art to Love.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
Quick proceeders, marry!  Now tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca
Loved [none] in the world so well as Lucentio.
O despiteful love, unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful.
Mistake no more, I am not Litio, 
Nor a musician, as I seem to be,
But one that scorn to live in this disguise 
For such a one as leaves a gentleman, 
And makes a god of such a cullion.
Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca,
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
See how they kiss and court!  Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her more, but do forswear her
As one unworthy all the former favors
That I have fondly flattered [her] withal.
And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Fie on her, see how beastly she doth court him!
Would all the world but he had quite for sworn! 
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow, 
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard. 
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio. 
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love, and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
Tranio, you jest, but have you both for sworn me?
Mistress, we have. Then we are rid of Litio.
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
God give him joy! Ay, and he'll tame her.
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master,
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long, 
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
O master, master, I have watched so long
That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn. What is he, Biondello?
Master, a mercantant, or a pedant,
I know not what, but formal in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.
If he be credulous, and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio.
Take [in] your love, and then let me alone.
God save you, sir! And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on or are you at the farthest?
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two, 
But then up farther, and as far as Rome,
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life. 
What countryman, I pray? Of Mantua.
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?
My life, sir? How, I pray? for that goes hard.
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua.  Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your Duke and him,
Hath published and proclaimed it openly.
'Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so,
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence, and must here deliver them.
This will I do, and this I will advise you.
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
Among them know you one Vincentio? 
I know him not, but I have heard of him;
A merchant of incomparable wealth. 
He is my father, sir, and sooth to say, 
In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
To save your life in this extremity,
This favor will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged.
Look that you take upon you as you should;
You understand me, sir? So shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city.
If this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
O sir, I do, and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This by the way I let you understand:
My father is here looked for every day,
To pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here. 
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you;
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
No, no, forsooth I dare not for my life.
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars that come unto my father's door
Upon entreaty have a present alms, 
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
But I, who never knew how to entreat, 
Nor never needed that I should entreat, 
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed;
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness, or else present death.
I prithee go, and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
'Tis passing good, I prithee let me have it.
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
I like it well, good Grumio, fetch it me.
I cannot tell, I fear 'tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
Why then the beef, and let the mustard rest.
Nay then I will not, you shall have the mustard, 
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
Then both or one, or any thing thou wilt. 
Why then the mustard without the beef. 
Go get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed'st me with the very name of meat.
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
That triumph thus upon my misery!
How fares my Kate?  What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what cheer? Faith, as cold as can be.
Pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.
Here, love, thou seest how diligent I am
To dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee.
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word?  Nay then, thou lov'st it not;
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
The poorest service is repaid with thanks, 
And so shall mine before you touch the meat.
Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame. 
Come, Mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.
Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me. --
Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love,
Will we return unto thy father's house,
And revel it as bravely as the best,
With silken coats and caps, and golden rings,
With ruffs and cuffs, and fardingales, and things,
With scarfs and fans, and double change of brav'ry,
With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.
What, hast thou dined?  The tailor stays thy leisure,
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
Lay forth the gown. What news with you, sir?
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
Why, this was moulded on a porringer -- 
A velvet dish.  Fie, fie, 'tis lewd and filthy.
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell, 
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap. 
Away with it! come let me have a bigger.
I'll have no bigger, this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then. That will not be in haste.
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak,
And speak I will.  I am no child, no babe;
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather than it shall, I will be free,
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
Why, thou say'st true, it is paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.
I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not.
Love me, or love me not, I like the cap,
And it I will have, or I will have none.
Thy gown? why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see't.
O mercy, God, what masquing stuff is here? 
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like demi-cannon. 
What, up and down carved like an apple-tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop.
I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.
Marry, and did; but if you be rememb'red,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir.
I'll none of it; hence, make your best of it.
I never saw a better fashioned gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
O monstrous arrogance!  Thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail! 
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou! 
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,
Or I shall so bemete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marred her gown.
Grumio gave order how it should be done.
I gave him no order, I gave him the stuff.
But how did you desire it should be made?
But did you not request to have it cut?
"With a small compassed cape" -- I confess the cape.
"With a trunk sleeve" -- I confess two sleeves.
"The sleeves curiously cut." Ay, there's the villainy.
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
You are i' th' right, sir, 'tis for my mistress.
Go take it up unto thy master's use.
Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid. --
Go take it hence, be gone, and say no more.
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow,
Take no unkindness of his hasty words.
Away, I say, commend me to thy master.
Well, come, my Kate, we will unto your father' s
Even in these honest mean habiliments; 
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor,
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich; 
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds, 
So honor peereth in the meanest habit.
What, is the jay more precious than the lark,
Because his feathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
If thou accountedst it shame, lay it on me,
And therefore frolic, we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
Go call my men, and let us straight to him,
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
Let's see, I think 'tis now some seven a' clock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.
I dare assure you, sir,'tis almost two,
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse.
Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone, 
I will not go today, and ere I do,
It shall be what a' clock I say it is. 
Why, so this gallant will command the sun.  
Ay, what else?  And but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista may remember me
Near twenty years ago in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
'Tis well, and hold your own in any case
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
I warrant you. But, sir, here comes your boy;
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
I told him that your father was at Venice, 
And that you looked for him this day in Padua. 
Th' art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista; set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of.
I pray you stand good father to me now, 
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
Sir, by your leave, having come to Padua 
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself;
And for the good report I hear of you,
And for the love he beareth to your daughter,
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good father's care,
To have him matched; and if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
With one consent to have her so bestowed;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say --
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections;
And therefore if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him, 
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
Your son shall have my daughter with consent. 
I thank you, sir.  Where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants;
Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,
And happily we might be interrupted.
There doth my father lie; and there this night
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here;
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
It likes me well.  Cambio, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And if you will, tell what hath happened:
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife. 
I pray the gods she may with all my heart! 
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone. 
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer.
Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.
I follow you. Cambio! What say'st thou, Biondello?
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you? 
I may and will, if she be so contented.
She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her;
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
Come on a, God's name, once more toward our fathers.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
The moon! the sun -- it is not moonlight now.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
Now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your father's house. --
Go on, and fetch our horses back again. --
Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
Say as he says, or we shall never go.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please;
And if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
Nay then you lie; it is the blessed sun.
Then God be blest, it [is] the blessed sun, 
But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
And the moon changes even as your mind. 
What you will have it named, even that it is, 
And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
Well, forward, forward, thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But soft company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
'A will make the man mad, to make [a] woman of him. 
Young budding virgin, fair, and fresh, and sweet,
Whither away, or [where] is thy abode? 
Happy the parents of so fair a child! 
Happier the man whom favorable stars
Allots thee for his lovely bedfellow!
Why, how now, Kate, I hope thou art not mad.
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered,
And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun,
That every thing I look on seemeth green;
Now I perceive thou art a reverent father.
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
Which way thou travellest -- if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
A  son of mine, which long I have not seen.
What is his name? Lucentio, gentle sir.
Happily met, the happier for thy son. 
And now by law, as well as reverent age, 
I may entitle thee my loving father.
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married.  Wonder not,
Nor be not grieved; she is of good esteem,
Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
Come go along and see the truth hereof
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she [be] froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward. 
Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
I fly, Biondello; but they may chance to need
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house.
My father's bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
You shall not choose but drink before you go.
I think I shall command your welcome here;
And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.
They're busy within, you were best knock louder. 
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate? 
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal. 
What if a man bring him a hundred pound
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved
Thou liest, his father is come from Padua
Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her. 
Come hither, you rogue.  What, have you forgot me?
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant? 
What am I, sir?  Nay, what are you, sir?
I charge you see that he be forthcoming. 
Stay, officer, he shall not go to prison. 
Talk not, Signior Gremio; I say he shall go to prison.
Swear if thou dar'st. Nay, I dare not swear it.
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio. 
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
Away with the dotard, to the jail with him!
Pardon, dear father. How hast thou offended? 
Where is Lucentio? Here's Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio,
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
Here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
Love wrought these miracles.  Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town,
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.  
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.
Why then let's home again.  Come, sirrah, let's away.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love, stay.
Better once than never, for never too late.  
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree,
And time it is, when raging war is [done],
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
My banket is to close our stomachs up
After our great good cheer.  Pray you sit down,
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow. 
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
I mean Hortensio is afeard of you.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Roundly replied. Mistress, how mean you that?
Conceives by me! how likes Hortensio that?
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
Very well mended.  Kiss him for that, good widow.
"He that is giddy thinks the world turns round":
I pray you tell me what you meant by that.
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
A very mean meaning. Right, I mean you.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down. 
Spoke like an officer. Ha' to thee, lad!
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
Ay, but not frighted me, therefore I'll sleep again.
Nay, that you shall not, since you have begun;
Have at you for a [bitter] jest or two!
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,
This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not;
Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
O, sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound, 
Which runs himself, and catches for his master.
A good swift simile, but something currish. 
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself; 
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
O, O, Petruchio, Tranio hits you now.
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
'A has a little galled me, I confess;
And as the jest did glance away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maimed you [two] outright.
Now in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Well, I say no; and therefore [for] assurance
And he whose wife is most obedient,
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.
Content.  What's the wager? Twenty crowns.
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.
A hundred then.  Content. A match! 'tis done. 
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.
I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.
That she is busy, and she cannot come.
How? she is busy, and she cannot come!
Is that an answer? Ay, and a kind one too.
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith. O ho, entreat her!
Nay then she must needs come. I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can,  yours will not be entreated. 
She says you have some goodly jest in hand. 
She will not come; she bids you come to her.
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vild,
Intolerable, not to be endured!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Now, by my holidam, here comes Katherina! 
What is your will, sir, that you send for me? 
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come,
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
And so it is; I wonder what it bodes.
Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
An aweful rule, and right supremacy;
And to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy.
Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won, and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed, as she had never been.
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
And show more sign of her obedience, 
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes, and brings your froward wives 
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not;
Off with that bable, throw it under-foot.
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
Fie, what a foolish duty call you this?
I would your duty were as foolish too.
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me [a] hundred crowns since supper-time.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Katherine, I charge thee tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
Come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.
Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
I say she shall, and first begin with her.
Fie, fie, unknit that threat'ning unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes, 
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor. 
It blots thy beauty, as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame, as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty,
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip, or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance; commits his body
To painful labor, both by sea and land;
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou li'st warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks, and true obedience --
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will, 
What is she but a foul contending rebel,
And graceless traitor to her loving lord? 
I am ashamed that women are so simple 
To offer war where they should kneel for peace,
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions, and our hearts,
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot;
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
Why, there's a wench!  Come on, and kiss me, Kate. 
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha't.
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward. 
But a harsh hearing when women are froward. 
We three are married, but you two are sped.
'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white,
And being a winner, God give you good night!
Now go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
<MNDVS> Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour 
Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in 
Another moon; but O, methinks, how slow  
This old moon [wanes]! She lingers my desires, 
Like to a step-dame, or a dowager,  
Long withering out a young man's revenue.  
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night; 
Four nights will quickly dream away the time; 
And then the moon, like to a silver bow 
[New] bent in heaven, shall behold the night 
Of our solemnities.  Go, Philostrate, 
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments, 
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth, 
Turn melancholy forth to funerals: 
The pale companion is not for our pomp. 
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword, 
And won thy love doing thee injuries; 
But I will wed thee in another key, 
With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling. 
Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke! 
Thanks, good Egeus. What's the news with thee?  
Full of vexation come I, with complaint 
Against my child, my daughter Hermia. 
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord, 
This man hath my consent to marry her. 
Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke, 
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. 
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, 
And interchanged love-tokens with my child; 
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung 
With faining voice verses of faining love, 
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy 
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits, 
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats -- messengers 
Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. 
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart, 
Turned her obedience (which is due to me) 
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke, 
Be it so she will not here before your Grace 
Consent to marry with Demetrius, 
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:  
As she is mine, I may dispose of her; 
Which shall be either to this gentleman,  
Or to her death, according to our law  
Immediately provided in that case. 
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid. 
To you your father should be as a god; 
One that composed your beauties; yea, and one 
To whom you are but as a form in wa
To leave the figure, or disfigure it. 
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman. 
So is Lysander.  In himself he is; 
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice, 
The other must be held the worthier. 
I would my father looked but with my eyes. 
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look. 
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me. 
I know not by what power I am made bold, 
Nor how it may concern my modesty, 
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts; 
But I beseech your Grace that I may know  
The worst that may befall me in this case, 
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.  
Either to die the death, or to abjure  
For ever the society of men. 
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires, 
Know of your youth, examine well your blood, 
Whether (if you yield not to your father's choice) 
You can endure the livery of a nun, 
For aye to be in shady cloister mewed, 
To live a barren sister all your life, 
Chaunting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. 
Thrice blessed they that master so their blood 
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage; 
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled, 
Than that which withering on the virgin thorn 
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness. 
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, 
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up 
Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke 
My soul consents not to give sovereignty. 
Take time to pause, and by the next new moon -- 
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me  
For everlasting bond of fellowship -- 
Upon that day either prepare to die  
For disobedience to your father's will,  
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would, 
Or on Diana's altar to protest 
For aye austerity and single life. 
Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield 
Thy crazed title to my certain right. 
You have her father's love, Demetrius, 
Let me have Hermia's; do you marry him. 
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love; 
And what is mine, my love shall render him. 
And she is mine, and all my right of her 
I do estate unto Demetrius. 
I am, my lord, as well derived as he, 
As well possessed; my love is more than his; 
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked 
(If not with vantage) as Demetrius'; 
And (which is more than all these boasts can be) 
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia. 
Why should not I then prosecute my right? 
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head, 
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,  
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes, 
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,  
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.  
I must confess that I have heard so much, 
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof; 
But, being over-full of self-affairs, 
My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come, 
And come, Egeus, you shall go with me; 
I have some private schooling for you both. 
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself 
To fit your fancies to your father's will; 
Or else the law of Athens yields you up 
(Which by no means we may extenuate) 
To death, or to a vow of single life. 
Come, my Hippolyta; what cheer, my love? 
Demetrius and Egeus, go along; 
I must employ you in some business 
Against our nuptial, and confer with you 
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves. 
With duty and desire we follow you. 
How now, my love? why is your cheek so pale?  
How chance the roses there do fade so fast? 
Belike for want of rain; which I could well  
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.  
Ay me! for aught that I could ever read, 
Could ever hear by tale or history, 
The course of true love never did run smooth; 
But either it was different in blood -- 
O cross! too high to be enthralled to [low]. 
Or else misgraffed in respect of years -- 
O spite! too old to be engaged to young. 
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends -- 
O hell, to choose love by another's eyes! 
Or if there were a sympathy in choice, 
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, 
Making it momentany as a sound, 
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream, 
Brief as the lightning in the collied night, 
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth; 
And ere a man hath power to say "Behold!" 
The jaws of darkness do devour it up: 
If then true lovers have been ever crossed, 
It stands as an edict in destiny.  
Because it is a customary cross,  
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,  
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers. 
A good persuasion; therefore hear me, Hermia: 
I have a widow aunt, a dowager, 
Of great revenue, and she hath no child. 
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues; 
And she respects me as her only son. 
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee; 
And to that place the sharp Athenian law 
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then 
Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night; 
And in the wood, a league without the town 
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena 
To do observance to a morn of May), 
There will I stay for thee.  My good Lysander, 
I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow, 
By his best arrow with the golden head, 
By the simplicity of Venus' doves, 
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, 
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen  
When the false Troyan under sail was seen, 
By all the vows that ever men have broke  
(In number more than ever women spoke),  
In that same place thou hast appointed me 
tomorrow truly will I meet with thee. 
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena. 
God speed fair Helena! whither away? 
Call you me fair?  That fair again unsay. 
Demetrius loves your fair, O happy fair! 
Your eyes are lodestars, and your tongue's sweet air 
More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear 
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. 
Sickness is catching; O, were favor so, 
[Yours would] I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go; 
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye, 
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody. 
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, 
The rest I'll give to be to you translated. 
O, teach me how you look, and with what art 
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.  
I frown upon him; yet he loves me still. 
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!  
I give him curses; yet he gives me love. 
O that my prayers could such affection move! 
The more I hate, the more he follows me. 
The more I love, the more he hateth me. 
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine. 
None but your beauty; would that fault were mine! 
Take comfort; he no more shall see my face;  
Lysander and myself will fly this place.  
Before the time I did Lysander see, 
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me; 
O then, what graces in my love do dwell, 
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell! 
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold: 
tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold 
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass, 
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass 
(A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), 
Through Athens gates have we devised to steal. 
And in the wood, where often you and I 
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie, 
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel [sweet], 
There my Lysander and myself shall meet; 
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes, 
To seek new friends and [stranger companies]. 
Farewell, sweet playfellow, pray thou for us; 
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius! 
Keep word, Lysander; we must starve our sight 
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.  
I will, my Hermia. Helena, adieu:  
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!  
How happy some o'er other some can be! 
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. 
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so; 
He will not know what all but he do know; 
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes, 
So I, admiring of his qualities. 
Things base and vile, holding no quantity, 
Love can transpose to form and dignity. 
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind; 
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. 
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste; 
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste; 
And therefore is Love said to be a child, 
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. 
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, 
So the boy Love is perjured every where; 
For ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne, 
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine; 
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,  
So he dissolved, and show'rs of oaths did melt. 
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight;  
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night  
Pursue her; and for this intelligence 
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense. 
But herein mean I to enrich my pain, 
To have his sight thither and back again.   
Answer as I call you.  Nick Bottom the weaver. 
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed. 
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus. 
What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant? 
How now, spirit, whither wander you? 
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear. 
Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone. 
Our Queen and all her elves come here anon. 
The King doth keep his revels here tonight; 
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight; 
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath, 
Because that she as her attendant hath 
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king; 
She never had so sweet a changeling. 
And jealous Oberon would have the child 
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild; 
But she, perforce, withholds the loved boy, 
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy. 
And now they never meet in grove or green, 
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen, 
But they do square, that all their elves for fear  
Creep into acorn-cups, and hide them there. 
Called Robin Goodfellow.  Are not you he 
That frights the maidens of the villagery, 
Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern, 
And bootless make the breathless huswife churn, 
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm, 
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm? 
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck, 
You do their work, and they shall have good luck. 
I am that merry wanderer of the night. 
I jest to Oberon and make him smile 
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, 
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal; 
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl, 
In very likeness of a roasted crab, 
And when she drinks, against her lips I bob, 
And on her withered dewlop pour the ale. 
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,  
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me; 
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,  
And "tailor" cries, and falls into a cough;  
And then the whole quire hold their hips and loff, 
And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear 
A merrier hour was never wasted there. 
But room, fairy! here comes Oberon. 
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone! 
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania. 
What, jealous Oberon?  (Fairies,) skip hence -- 
I have forsworn his bed and company. 
Tarry, rash wanton!  Am not I thy lord? 
Then I must be thy lady; but I know 
When thou hast stolen away from fairy land, 
And in the shape of Corin sat all day, 
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love,  
To amorous Phillida.  Why art thou here 
Come from the farthest steep of India?  
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,  
Your buskined mistress, and your warrior love, 
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come 
To give their bed joy and prosperity. 
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania, 
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta, 
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus? 
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night 
From Perigenia, whom he ravished? 
And make him with fair [Aegles] break his faith, 
These are the forgeries of jealousy; 
And never, since the middle summer's spring, 
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, 
By paved fountain or by rushy brook, 
Or in the beached margent of the sea, 
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, 
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. 
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, 
As in revenge, have sucked up from the sea 
Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,  
Hath every pelting river made so proud 
That they have overborne their continents.  
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,  
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn 
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard. 
The fold stands empty in the drowned field, 
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock; 
The nine men's morris is filled up with mud, 
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green, 
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable. 
The human mortals want their winter here; 
No night is now with hymn or carol blest. 
Therefore the moon (the governess of floods), 
Pale in her anger, washes all the air, 
That rheumatic diseases do abound. 
And thorough this distemperature, we see 
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts 
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, 
And on old Hiems' [thin] and icy crown 
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds 
Is, as in mockery, set; the spring, the summer, 
The childing autumn, angry winter, change 
Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,  
By their increase, now knows not which is which. 
And this same progeny of evils comes  
We are their parents and original. 
Do you amend it then; it lies in you. 
Why should Titania cross her Oberon? 
I do but beg a little changeling boy, 
To be my henchman. Set your heart at rest; 
The fairy land buys not the child of me. 
His mother was a vot'ress of my order, 
And in the spiced Indian air, by night, 
Full often hath she gossiped by my side, 
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands, 
Marking th' embarked traders on the flood; 
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive 
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; 
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait, 
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire) 
Would imitate, and sail upon the land 
To fetch me trifles, and return again, 
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise. 
But she, being mortal, of that boy did  
And for her sake do I rear up her boy; 
And for her sake I will not part with him.  
How long within this wood intend you stay?  
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day. 
If you will patiently dance in our round, 
And see our moonlight revels, go with us; 
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts. 
Give me that boy, and I will go with thee. 
Not for thy fairy kingdom.  Fairies, away! 
We shall chide downright, if I longer stay. 
Well; go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove 
Till I torment thee for this injury. 
My gentle Puck, come hither.  Thou rememb'rest 
Since once I sat upon a promontory, 
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back 
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath 
That the rude sea grew civil at her song 
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres, 
To hear the sea-maid's music? I remember. 
That very time I saw (but thou couldst not),  
Flying between the cold moon and the earth, 
Cupid all armed.  A certain aim he took  
At a fair vestal throned by [the] west,  
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow, 
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts; 
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft 
Quenched in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon, 
And the imperial vot'ress passed on, 
In maiden meditation, fancy-free. 
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell. 
It fell upon a little western flower, 
Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound, 
And maidens call it love-in-idleness. 
Fetch me that flow'r; the herb I showed thee once. 
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid 
Upon the next live creature that it sees. 
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again 
Ere the leviathan can swim a league. 
I'll put a girdle round about the earth 
In forty minutes. Having once this juice, 
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep,  
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes; 
The next thing then she waking looks upon  
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,  
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape), 
She shall pursue it with the soul of love. 
And ere I take this charm from off her sight 
(As I can take it with another herb), 
I'll make her render up her page to me. 
But who comes here?  I am invisible, 
And I will overhear their conference. 
I love thee not; therefore pursue me not. 
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia? 
The one I'll [slay]; the other [slayeth] me. 
Thou toldst me they were stol'n unto this wood; 
And here am I, and wode within this wood, 
Because I cannot meet my Hermia. 
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more. 
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant; 
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart 
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,  
And I shall have no power to follow you. 
Do I entice you?  Do I speak you fair?  
Or rather do I not in plainest truth  
Tell you I do not [nor] I cannot love you? 
And even for that do I love you the more: 
I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius, 
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you. 
Use me but as your spaniel; spurn me, strike me, 
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave, 
Unworthy as I am, to follow you. 
What worser place can I beg in your love 
(And yet a place of high respect with me) 
Than to be used as you use your dog? 
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit, 
For I am sick when I do look on thee. 
And I am sick when I look not on you. 
You do impeach your modesty too much, 
To leave the city and commit yourself 
Into the hands of one that loves you not; 
To trust the opportunity of night, 
And the ill counsel of a desert place, 
With the rich worth of your virginity. 
Your virtue is my privilege.  For that  
It is not night when I do see your face, 
Therefore I think I am not in the night,  
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,  
For you in my respect are all the world. 
Then how can it be said I am alone, 
When all the world is here to look on me? 
I'll run from thee, and hide me in the brakes, 
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts. 
The wildest hath not such a heart as you. 
Run when you will; the story shall be changed: 
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase; 
The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind 
Makes speed to catch the tiger -- bootless speed, 
When cowardice pursues and valor flies. 
I will not stay thy questions.  Let me go; 
Or if thou follow me, do not believe 
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood. 
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field, 
You do me mischief.  Fie, Demetrius! 
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex. 
We cannot fight for love, as men may do. 
We should be wooed, and were not made to woo. 
I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, 
To die upon the hand I love so well.
Fare thee well, nymph.  Ere he do leave this grove, 
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love. 
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer. 
Ay, there it is. I pray thee give it me. 
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows, 
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, 
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine, 
With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine; 
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night, 
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight; 
And there the snake throws her enamelled skin, 
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in; 
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes, 
And make her full of hateful fantasies. 
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove: 
A sweet Athenian lady is in love  
With a disdainful youth; anoint his eyes, 
But do it when the next thing he espies  
May be the lady.  Thou shalt know the man  
By the Athenian garments he hath on. 
Effect it with some care, that he may prove 
More fond on her than she upon her love; 
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow. 
Fear not, my lord! your servant shall do so. 
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song; 
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence, 
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, 
Some war with rere-mice for their leathren wings 
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back 
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots and wonders 
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep; 
Then to your offices, and let me rest. 
Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood; 
And to speak troth I have forgot our way. 
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good, 
And tarry for the comfort of the day.  
Be't so, Lysander.  Find you out a bed; 
For I upon this bank will rest my head.  
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both,  
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth. 
Nay, [good] Lysander; for my sake, my dear, 
Lie further off yet; do not lie so near. 
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence! 
Love takes the meaning in love's conference: 
I mean, that my heart unto yours [is] knit, 
So that but one heart we can make of it; 
Two bosoms interchained with an oath, 
So then two bosoms and a single troth. 
Then by your side no bed-room me deny; 
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie. 
Lysander riddles very prettily. 
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride, 
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. 
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy, 
Lie further off, in humane modesty; 
Such separation as may well be said 
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid, 
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend. 
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!  
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I, 
And then end life when I end loyalty!  
Here is my bed; sleep give thee all his rest!  
With half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!
Stay -- though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius. 
I charge thee hence, and do not haunt me thus. 
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so. 
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase! 
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. 
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, 
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes. 
How came her eyes so bright?  Not with salt tears; 
If so, my eyes are oft'ner washed than hers. 
No, no; I am as ugly as a bear; 
For beasts that meet me run away for fear. 
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius 
Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus. 
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine 
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne!  
But who is here? Lysander! on the ground? 
Dead, or asleep?  I see no blood, no wound.  
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.  
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake. 
Transparent Helena, nature shows art, 
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. 
Where is Demetrius?  O, how fit a word 
Is that vile name to perish on my sword! 
Do not say so, Lysander, say not so. 
What though he love your Hermia?  Lord, what though? 
Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content. 
Content with Hermia?  No; I do repent 
The tedious minutes I with her have spent. 
Not Hermia, but Helena I love. 
Who will not change a raven for a dove? 
The will of man is by his reason swayed; 
And reason says you are the worthier maid. 
Things growing are not ripe until their season, 
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason; 
And touching now the point of human skill, 
Reason becomes the marshal to my will,  
And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook 
Love's stories written in Love's richest book.  
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?  
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn? 
Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man, 
That I did never, no, nor never can, 
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye, 
But you must flout my insufficiency? 
Good troth, you do me wrong (good sooth, you do) 
In such disdainful manner me to woo. 
But fare you well; perforce I must confess 
I thought you lord of more true gentleness. 
O that a lady, of one man refused, 
Should of another therefore be abused!
She sees not Hermia.  Hermia, sleep thou there, 
And never mayst thou come Lysander near! 
For as a surfeit of the sweetest things 
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings, 
Or as the heresies that men do leave 
Are hated most of those they did deceive, 
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, 
Of all be hated, but the most of me!  
And, all my powers, address your love and might 
To honor Helen and to be her knight.
Help me, Lysander, help me!  do thy best 
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast! 
Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here! 
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear. 
Methought a serpent eat my heart away, 
And you sate smiling at his cruel prey. 
Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord! 
What, out of hearing gone? No sound, no word? 
Alack, where are you?  Speak, and if you hear; 
Speak, of all loves!  I swoon almost with fear. 
No? then I well perceive you are not nigh: 
Either death, or you, I'll find immediately.
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play? 
What hempen home-spuns have we swagg'ring here, 
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen? 
What, a play toward? I'll be an auditor, 
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause. 
"Thisby, the flowers of odious savors sweet -- 
[Odorous], odorous. -- "odors savors sweet; 
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear. 
But hark; a voice! Stay thou but here a while, 
And by and by I will to thee appear."
A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here. 
"If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine." 
Pray, masters, fly, masters! Help! 
I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round,  
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,  
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire, 
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, 
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn. 
What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed? 
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. 
Mine ear is much enamored of thy note; 
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape; 
And thy fair virtue's force (perforce) doth move me 
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee. 
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful. 
Out of this wood do not desire to go; 
Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no. 
I am a spirit of no common rate; 
The summer still doth tend upon my state; 
And I do love thee; therefore go with me. 
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee; 
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, 
And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep. 
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so, 
That thou shalt like an aery spirit go. 
Peaseblossom!  Cobweb!  Moth! and Mustardseed! 
And I.  And I. And I. Where shall we go? 
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman, 
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes; 
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries, 
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries; 
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees, 
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs, 
And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes, 
To have my love to bed and to arise; 
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies, 
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes. 
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies. 
Hail, mortal! Hail! Hail! Hail! 
Come wait upon him; lead him to my bower. 
The moon methinks looks with a wat'ry eye; 
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower, 
Lamenting some enforced chastity. 
Tie up my lover's tongue, bring him silently.  
I wonder if Titania be awaked; 
Then what it was that next came in her eye, 
Which she must dote on in extremity. 
Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit? 
What night-rule now about this haunted grove? 
My mistress with a monster is in love. 
Near to her close and consecrated bower, 
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, 
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals, 
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, 
Were met together to rehearse a play 
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day. 
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, 
Who Pyramus presented, in their sport, 
Forsook his scene, and ent'red in a brake; 
When I did him at this advantage take, 
An ass's nole I fixed on his head.  
Anon his Thisby must be answered, 
And forth my mimic comes.  When they him spy,  
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,  
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort 
(Rising and cawing at the gun's report), 
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky, 
So, at his sight, away his follows fly; 
And at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls, 
He murther cries, and help from Athens calls. 
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, 
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong, 
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch; 
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch. 
I led them on in this distracted fear, 
And left sweet Pyramus translated there; 
When in that moment (so it came to pass) 
Titania waked, and straightway loved an ass. 
This falls out better than I could devise. 
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian's eyes 
With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do? 
I took him sleeping (that is finished too)  
And the Athenian woman by his side; 
That when he waked, of force she must be eyed.  
Stand close; this is the same Athenian. 
This is the woman; but not this the man. 
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so? 
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe. 
Now I but chide; but I should use thee worse, 
For thou (I fear) hast given me cause to curse. 
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, 
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, 
The sun was not so true unto the day 
As he to me. Would he have stolen away 
From sleeping Hermia?  I'll believe as soon 
This whole earth may be bored, and that the moon 
May through the centre creep, and so displease 
Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes. 
It cannot be but thou hast murd'red him; 
So should a murtherer look -- so dead, so grim.  
So should the murthered look, and so should I, 
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.  
Yet you, the murtherer, look as bright, as clear,  
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere. 
What's this to my Lysander? Where is he? 
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me? 
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds. 
Out, dog, out, cur! thou driv'st me past the bounds 
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him then? 
Henceforth be never numb'red among men! 
O, once tell true; tell true, even for my sake! 
Durst thou have looked upon him being awake? 
And hast thou killed him sleeping?  O brave touch! 
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much? 
An adder did it! for with doubler tongue 
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung. 
You spend your passion on a misprised mood. 
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood; 
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell. 
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well. 
And if I could, what should I get therefore? 
A privilege never to see me more.  
And from thy hated presence part I so
There is no following her in this fierce vein.  
Here therefore for a while I will remain. 
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow 
For debt that bankrout [sleep] doth sorrow owe; 
Which now in some slight measure it will pay, 
If for his tender here I make some stay. 
What hast thou done?  Thou hast mistaken quite, 
And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight. 
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue 
Some true love turned, and not a false turned true. 
Then fate o'errules, that one man holding troth, 
A million fail, confounding oath on oath. 
About the wood go swifter than the wind, 
And Helena of Athens look thou find. 
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer 
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear. 
By some illusion see thou bring her here. 
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear. 
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?  
Scorn and derision never come in tears.  
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born, 
In their nativity all truth appears. 
How can these things in me seem scorn to you, 
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true? 
You do advance your cunning more and more; 
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray! 
These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er? 
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh. 
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales, 
Will even weigh; and both as light as tales. 
I had no judgment when to her I swore. 
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er. 
Demetrius loves her; and he loves not you. 
O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! 
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne? 
Crystal is muddy.  O, how ripe in show 
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow! 
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,  
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow 
When thou hold'st up thy hand.  O, let me kiss  
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!  
O spite!  O hell!  I see you all are bent 
To set against me for your merriment. 
If you were civil and knew courtesy, 
You would not do me thus much injury. 
Can you not hate me, as I know you do, 
But you must join in souls to mock me too? 
If you were men, as men you are in show, 
You would not use a gentle lady so; 
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts, 
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts. 
You both are rivals, and love Hermia; 
And now both rivals, to mock Helena. 
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise, 
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes 
With your derision!  None of noble sort 
Would so offend a virgin, and extort 
A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport. 
You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so; 
For you love Hermia; this you know I know. 
And here, with all good will, with all my heart,  
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part; 
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,  
Whom I do love, and will do till my death.  
Never did mockers waste more idle breath. 
Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none. 
If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone. 
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, 
And now to Helen is it home returned, 
There to remain. Helen, it is not so. 
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know, 
Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear. 
Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear. 
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes, 
The ear more quick of apprehension makes; 
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, 
It pays the hearing double recompense. 
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found; 
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.  
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so? 
Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?  
What love could press Lysander from my side? 
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide -- 
Fair Helena! who more engilds the night 
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. 
Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee know, 
The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so? 
You speak not as you think.  It cannot be. 
Lo! she is one of this confederacy. 
Now I perceive, they have conjoined all three 
To fashion this false sport, in spite of me. 
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid! 
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived 
Is all the counsel that we two have shared, 
The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent, 
When we have chid the hasty-footed time 
For parting us -- O, is all forgot? 
All school-days friendship, childhood innocence? 
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,  
Have with our needles created both one flower, 
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,  
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,  
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds 
Had been incorporate. So we grew together, 
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted, 
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem; 
So with two seeming bodies, but one heart, 
Two of the first, [like] coats in heraldry, 
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest. 
And will you rent our ancient love asunder, 
To join with men in scorning your poor friend? 
It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly. 
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it, 
Though I alone do feel the injury. 
I am amazed at your [passionate] words. 
I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me. 
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn, 
To follow me and praise my eyes and face? 
And made your other love, Demetrius 
(Who even but now did spurn me with his foot), 
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,  
Precious, celestial?  Wherefore speaks he this 
To her he hates?  And wherefore doth Lysander  
Deny your love (so rich within his soul)  
But by your setting on, by your consent? 
What though I be not so in grace as you, 
So hung upon with love, so fortunate 
(But miserable most, to love unloved)? 
This you should pity rather than despise. 
I understand not what you mean by this. 
Ay, do! persever, counterfeit sad looks, 
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back, 
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up; 
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled. 
If you have any pity, grace, or manners, 
You would not make me such an argument. 
But fare ye well; 'tis partly my own fault, 
Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy. 
Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse, 
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena! 
O excellent! Sweet, do not scorn her so. 
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.  
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat. 
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak [prays].  
Helen, I love thee, by my life I do! 
I swear by that which I will lose for thee, 
To prove him false that says I love thee not. 
I say I love thee more than he can do. 
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too. 
Quick, come! Lysander, whereto tends all this? 
Away, you Ethiop! No, no; he'll 
Seem to break loose -- take on as you would follow, 
But yet come not.  You are a tame man, go! 
Hang off, thou cat, thou bur!  Vile thing, let loose; 
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent! 
Why are you grown so rude?  What change is this, 
Sweet love? Thy love?  Out, tawny Tartar, out! 
Do you not jest?  Yes, sooth; and so do you. 
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.  
I would I had your bond, for I perceive  
A weak bond holds you.  I'll not trust your word. 
What? should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead? 
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so. 
What? can you do me greater harm than hate? 
Hate me, wherefore?  O me, what news, my love! 
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander? 
I am as fair now as I was erewhile. 
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left me: 
Why then, you left me (O, the gods forbid!) 
In earnest, shall I say? Ay, by my life; 
And never did desire to see thee more. 
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt; 
Be certain! nothing truer; 'tis no jest 
That I do hate thee, and love Helena. 
O me, you juggler, you canker-blossom, 
You thief of love!  What, have you come by night 
And stol'n my love's heart from him?  Fine, i' faith! 
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,  
No touch of bashfulness?  What, will you tear  
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue? 
Fie, de, you counterfeit, you puppet. you! 
"Puppet"?  Why so?  Ay, that way goes the game. 
Now I  perceive that she hath made compare 
Between our statures: she hath urged her height, 
And with her personage, her tall personage, 
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him. 
And are you grown so high in his esteem, 
Because I are so dwarfish and so low? 
How low am I, thou painted maypole?  Speak! 
How low am I?  I am not yet so low 
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes. 
I pray you, though you mock me, [gentlemen], 
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst; 
I have no gift at all in shrewishness; 
I am a right maid for my cowardice. 
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think, 
Because she is something lower than myself, 
That I can match her.  "Lower"? hark again. 
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.  
I evermore did love you, Hermia,  
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you; 
Save that, in love unto Demetrius, 
I told him of your stealth unto this wood. 
He followed you; for love I followed him. 
But he hath chid me hence, and threat'ned me 
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too. 
And now, so you will let me quiet go, 
To Athens will I bear my folly back, 
And follow you no further. Let me go. 
You see how simple and how fond I am. 
Why, get you gone.  Who is't that hinders you? 
A foolish heart, that I leave here behind. 
What, with Lysander? With Demetrius.  
Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena. 
No, sir; she shall not, though you take her part.  
O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd! 
She was a vixen when she went to school; 
And though she be but little, she is fierce. 
"Little" again?  Nothing but "low" and "little"? 
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus? 
Let me come to her. Get you gone, you dwarf; 
You minimus, of hind'ring knot-grass made; 
You bead, you acorn. You are too officious 
In her behalf that scorns your services. 
Let her alone; speak not of Helena, 
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend 
Never so little show of love to her, 
Thou shalt aby it. Now she holds me not; 
Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right, 
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena. 
Follow?  Nay; I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.  
Nay, go not back.  I will not trust you, I, 
Nor longer stay in your curst company. 
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray; 
My legs are longer though, to run away.
I am amazed, and know not what to say.  
This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st, 
Or else commit'st thy knaveries willfully. 
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook. 
Did not you tell me I should know the man 
By the Athenian garments he had on? 
And so far blameless proves my enterprise, 
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes; 
And so far am I glad it so did sort, 
As this their jangling I esteem a sport. 
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight; 
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night; 
The starry welkin cover thou anon 
With drooping fog as black as Acheron, 
And lead these testy rivals so astray 
As one come not within another's way.  
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue; 
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;  
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;  
And from each other look thou lead them thus, 
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep 
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. 
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye; 
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property, 
To take from thence all error with his might, 
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. 
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend 
With league whose date till death shall never end. 
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, 
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy; 
And then I will her charmed eye release 
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace. 
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste, 
For Night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, 
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger, 
At whose approach, ghosts, wand'ring here and there, 
Troop home to churchyards.  Damned spirits all,  
That in crossways and floods have burial, 
Already to their wormy beds are gone.  
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,  
They willfully themselves exile from light, 
And must for aye consort with black-browed Night. 
But we are spirits of another sort. 
I with the Morning's love have oft made sport, 
And like a forester, the groves may tread 
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red, 
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams, 
Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams. 
But not withstanding, haste, make no delay; 
We may effect this business yet ere day.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius?  Speak thou now. 
Here, villain, drawn and ready.  Where art thou?  
I will be with thee straight. Follow me then  
To plainer ground.  Lysander, speak again! 
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled? 
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head? 
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, 
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars, 
And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child, 
I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled 
That draws a sword on thee. Yea, art thou there? 
Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.
He goes before me, and still dares me on. 
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.  
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I; 
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,  
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,  
And here will rest me.  Come, thou gentle day! 
For if but once thou show me thy grey light, 
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.   
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not? 
Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot 
Thou run'st before me, shifting every place, 
And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face. 
Where art thou now? Come hither; I am here. 
Nay then thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear, 
If ever I thy face by daylight see. 
Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me 
To measure out my length on this cold bed. 
By day's approach look to be visited. 
O weary night, O long and tedious night, 
Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east, 
That I may back to Athens by daylight, 
From these that my poor company detest. 
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye, 
Steal me a while from mine own company.   
Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, 
I can no further crawl, no further go; 
My legs can keep no pace with my desires. 
Here will I rest me till the break of day. 
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!  
Come sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed, 
While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, 
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head, 
And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy. 
Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed.  
Pray you, leave your curtsy, good mounsieur. 
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.  
Fairies, be gone, and be [all ways] away. 
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle  
Gently entwist; the female ivy so 
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm. 
O, how I love thee! how I dote on thee!  
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight? 
Her dotage now I do begin to pity. 
For meeting her of late behind the wood, 
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool, 
I did upbraid her, and fall out with her. 
For she his hairy temples then had rounded 
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers; 
And that same dew which sometime on the buds 
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, 
Stood now within the pretty flouriets'' eyes, 
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. 
When I had at my pleasure taunted her, 
I then did ask of her her changeling child; 
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent  
To bear him to my bower in fairy land. 
And now I have the boy, I will undo 
This hateful imperfection of her eyes. 
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp 
From off the head of this Athenian swain,  
That he, awaking when the other do, 
May all to Athens back again repair,  
And think no more of this night's accidents  
But as the fierce vexation of a dream. 
But first I will release the Fairy Queen. 
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen. 
My Oberon, what visions have I seen! 
Methought I was enamored of an ass. 
There lies your love. How came these things to pass? 
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now! 
Silence a while. Robin, take off this head. 
Titania, music call, and strike more dead 
Than common sleep of all these [five] the sense. 
Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep! 
Now, when thou wak'st, with thine own fool's eyes peep.  
Sound, music!   Come, my queen, take hands with me,  
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.  
Now thou and I are new in amity, 
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly 
Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly, 
And bless it to all fair prosperity. 
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be 
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity. 
Go, one of you, find out the forester, 
For now our observation is performed,  
And since we have the vaward of the day,  
My love shall hear the music of my hounds. 
Uncouple in the western valley, let them go. 
Dispatch, I say, and find the forester. 
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top, 
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once, 
When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear 
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear 
Such gallant chiding; for besides the groves, 
The skies, the fountains, every region near 
Seem all one mutual cry. I never heard 
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder. 
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind; 
So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung 
With ears that sweep away the morning dew; 
Crook-kneed, and dewlapped like Thessalian bulls; 
Slow in pursuit; but matched in mouth like bells, 
Each under each. A cry more tuneable  
Was never hollowed to, nor cheered with horn, 
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.  
Judge when you hear.  But soft!  What nymphs are these? 
My lord, this' my daughter here asleep, 
And this Lysander, this Demetrius is, 
This Helena, old Nedar's Helena. 
I wonder of their being here together. 
No doubt they rose up early to observe 
The rite of May; and hearing our intent, 
Came here in grace of our solemnity. 
But speak, Egeus, is not this the day 
That Hermia should give answer of her choice? 
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns. 
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past; 
Begin these wood-birds but to couple now? 
Pardon, my lord. I pray you all, stand up. 
I know you two are rival enemies.  
How comes this gentle concord in the world, 
That hatred is so far from jealousy  
To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?  
My lord, I shall reply amazedly, 
Half sleep, half waking; but, as yet, I swear, 
I cannot truly say how I came here. 
But, as I think -- for truly would I speak, 
And now I do bethink me, so it is -- 
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent 
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might, 
Without the peril of the Athenian law -- 
Enough, enough, my lord; you have enough. 
I beg the law, the law, upon his head. 
They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius, 
Thereby to have defeated you and me: 
You of your wife, and me of my consent, 
Of my consent that she should be your wife. 
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, 
Of this their purpose hither to this wood, 
And I in fury hither followed them, 
Fair Helena in fancy following me. 
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power 
(But by some power it is), my love to Hermia  
(Melted as the snow) seems to me now 
As the remembrance of an idle gaud,  
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;  
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart, 
The object and the pleasure of mine eye, 
Is only Helena. To her, my lord, 
Was I betrothed ere I [saw] Hermia; 
But like a sickness did I loathe this food; 
But, as in health, come to my natural taste, 
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it, 
And will for evermore be true to it. 
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met; 
Of this discourse we more will hear anon. 
Egeus, I will overbear your will; 
For in the temple, by and by, with us 
These couples shall eternally be knit. 
And, for the morning now is something worn 
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside. 
Away with us to Athens. Three and three, 
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity. 
These things seem small and undistinguishable,  
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds. 
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,  
When every thing seems double.  So methinks; 
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel, 
Mine own, and not mine own. Are you sure 
That we are awake? It seems to me 
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think 
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him? 
Yea, and my father. And Hippolyta. 
And he did bid us follow to the temple. 
Why then, we are awake. Let's follow him, 
And by the way let's recount our dreams. 
'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of. 
More strange than true. I never may believe 
These antic fables, nor these fairy toys. 
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, 
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend 
More than cool reason ever comprehends. 
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet 
Are of imagination all compact. 
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold; 
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic, 
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt. 
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, 
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;  
And as imagination bodies forth 
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen  
Turns them to shapes, and gives to aery nothing  
A local habitation and a name. 
That if it would but apprehend some joy, 
It comprehends some bringer of that joy; 
Or in the night, imagining some fear, 
How easy is a bush supposed a bear! 
But all the story of the night told over, 
And all their minds transfigured so together, 
More witnesseth than fancy's images, 
And grows to something of great constancy; 
But howsoever, strange and admirable. 
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth. 
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love 
Accompany your hearts! More than to us 
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!  
Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,  
To wear away this long age of three hours  
Between [our] after-supper and bed-time? 
Where is our usual manager of mirth? 
What revels are in hand? Is there no play 
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour? 
Call Philostrate. Here, mighty Theseus. 
Say, what abridgment have you for this evening? 
What masque? what music?  How shall we beguile 
The lazy time, if not with some delight? 
There is a brief how many sports are ripe. 
Make choice of which your Highness will see first. 
"The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung 
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp." 
We'll none of that: that have I told my love, 
In glory of my kinsman Hercules. 
"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, 
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."  
That is an old device; and it was played 
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.  
"The thrice three Muses mourning for the death  
Of Learning, late deceased in beggary." 
That is some satire, keen and critical, 
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. 
"A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus 
And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth." 
Merry and tragical? Tedious and brief? 
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow. 
How shall we find the concord of this discord? 
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long, 
Which is as brief as I have known a play; 
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long, 
Which makes it tedious; for in all the play 
There is not one word apt, one player fitted. 
And tragical, my noble lord, it is; 
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself; 
Which when I saw rehearsed, I must confess, 
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears 
The passion of loud laughter never shed. 
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here, 
Which never labored in their minds till now;  
And now have toiled their unbreathed memories  
With this same play, against your nuptial. 
And we will hear it. No, my noble lord, 
It is not for you. I have heard it over, 
And it is nothing, nothing in the world; 
Unless you can find sport in their intents, 
Extremely stretched, and conned with cruel pain, 
To do you service. I will hear that play; 
For never any thing can be amiss, 
When simpleness and duty tender it. 
Go bring them in; and take your places, ladies. 
I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharged, 
And duty in his service perishing. 
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing. 
He says they can do nothing in this kind. 
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.  
Our sport shall be to take what the mistake; 
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed 
To greet me with premeditated welcomes; 
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale, 
Make periods in the midst of sentences, 
Throttle their practiced accent in their fears, 
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off, 
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet, 
Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome; 
And in the modesty of fearful duty 
I read as much as from the rattling tongue 
Of saucy and audacious eloquence. 
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity 
In least speak most, to my capacity. 
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed. 
If we offend, it is with our good will.  
That you should think, we come not to offend,  
But with good will. To show our simple skill, 
That is the true beginning of our end. 
We do not come, as minding to content you, 
Our true intent is.  All for your delight 
We are not here. That you should here repent you, 
The actors are at hand; and, by their show, 
You shall know all, that you are like to know. 
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;  
But wonder on till truth make all things plain.  
This man is Pyramus, if you would know; 
This beauteous lady Thisby is certain. 
This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present 
Wall, that vile Wall, which did these lovers sunder; 
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are content 
To whisper. At the which let no man wonder. 
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn, 
Presenteth Moonshine; for if you will know, 
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn 
To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo. 
This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name, 
The trusty Thisby, coming first by night, 
Did scare away, or rather did affright; 
And as she fled, her mantle she did fall, 
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. 
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall, 
And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain; 
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade, 
He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast; 
And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade,  
His dagger drew, and died.  For all the rest, 
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain  
At large discourse, while here they do remain.  
I wonder if the lion be to speak. 
In this same enterlude it doth befall 
That I, one [Snout] by name, present a wall; 
And such a wall, as I would have you think, 
That had in it a crannied hole or chink, 
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby, 
Did whisper often, very secretly. 
This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone doth show 
That I am that same wall; the truth is so, 
And this the cranny is, right and sinister, 
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper. 
Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence!  
O grim-looked night!  O night with hue so black! 
O night, which ever art when day is not! 
O night, O night! alack, alack, alack, 
I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot! 
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall, 
That stand'st between her father's ground and mine! 
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall, 
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne! 
Thanks, courteous wall; Jove shield thee well for this! 
But what see I? No Thisby do I see. 
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss! 
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me! 
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, 
For parting my fair Pyramus and me! 
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones, 
Thy stones with lime and hair knit [up in thee]. 
I see a voice! Now will I to the chink, 
To spy and I can hear my Thisby's face. 
Thisby! My love thou art, my love I think. 
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace; 
And, like Limander, am I trusty still. 
And I, like Helen, till the Fates me kill. 
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true. 
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you. 
O, kiss me through the hole of this vild wall! 
I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all. 
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway? 
'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay. 
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so; 
And being done, thus Wall away doth go.  
Now is the moon used between the two neighbors.  
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so  
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard. 
The best in this kind are but shadows; and 
You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear 
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor, 
May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here, 
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. 
Then know that I as Snug the joiner am 
A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam, 
For, if I should, as lion, come in strife 
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life. 
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience. 
This lion is a very fox for his valor.  
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present -- 
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present; 
Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be. 
This is the greatest error of all the rest. 
This is old Ninny's tomb.  Where is my love? 
O! Well roared, Lion. Well run, Thisby. 
Well moused, Lion.  And then came Pyramus.   
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams; 
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright; 
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering [gleams], 
I trust to take of truest Thisby sight. 
What dreadful dole is here! Eyes, do you see? 
How can it be? O  dainty duck!  O dear! 
Thy mantle good, What, stained with blood? 
Approach, ye Furies fell! O Fates, come, come, 
Cut thread and thrum, Quail, crush, conclude, and quell! 
This passion, and the death of a dear friend,  
Would go near to make a man look sad. 
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.  
O, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?  
Since lion vild hath here deflow'red my dear; 
Which is -- no, no -- which was the fairest dame 
That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer. 
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead. 
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. 
Lovers, to bed, 'tis almost fairy time. 
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn 
As much as we this night have overwatched. 
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled 
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed. 
A fortnight hold we this solemnity, 
In nightly revels and new jollity.
<1H4vs> So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in stronds afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood, 
No more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs 
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes, 
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery,
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ --
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight --
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were moulded in their mother's womb,
To chase these pagans in those holy fields,
Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go; 
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmerland, 
What yesternight our Council did decree 
In forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question.
And many limits of the charge set down
But yesternight, when all athwart there came
A post from Wales loaden with heavy news,
Whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of [Herfordshire] to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse' there was such misuse,
Such beastly shameless transformation,
By those Welshwomen done as may not be
Without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This matched with other did, my gracious lord,
For more uneven and unwelcome news
Came from the north, and thus it did import: 
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald, 
That ever-valiant and approved Scot, 
Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
As by discharge of their artillery
And shape of likelihood the news was told;
For he that brought them, in the very heat
And pride of their contention did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is [a] dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse,
Stained with the variation of each soil
Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours;
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
Balked in their own blood, did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took
Mordake Earl of Fife and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorable spoil? 
A gallant prize? Ha, cousin, is it not?
It is a conquest for a prince to boast of. 
Yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin
In envy that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the father to so blest a son --
A son who is the theme of honor's tongue,
Amongst a grove the very straightest plant,
Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride,
Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
See riot and dishonor stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
Of this young Percy's pride? The prisoners
Which he in this adventure hath surprised
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all aspects, 
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up 
The crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this;
And for this cause a while we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next our Council we
Will hold at Windsor, so inform the lords.
But come yourself with speed to us again,
For more is to be said and to be done
Than out of anger can be uttered.
I know you all, and will a while uphold
The unyoked humor of your idleness,
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wond'red at
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wished for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promised, 
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes, 
And like bright metal on a sullen ground, 
My reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend, to make offense a skill,
Redeeming time when men think least I will.  
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me, for accordingly
You tread upon my patience; but be sure
I will from henceforth rather be myself,
Mighty and to be feared, than my condition,
Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
And therefore lost that title of respect
Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud. 
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it, 
And that same greatness too which our own hands 
Worcester, get thee gone, for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye.
O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And majesty might never yet endure
The moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.  Yea, my good lord.
Those prisoners in your Highness' name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
As is delivered to your Majesty.
Either envy, therefore, or misprision
Is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners,
But I remember, when the fight was done, 
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, 
Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dressed, 
Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped
Showed like a stubble-land at harvest-home.
He was perfumed like a milliner,
And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose and took't away again,
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in snuff -- and still he smiled and talked:
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
He called them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday and lady terms
He questioned me, amongst the rest demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
To be so pest'red with a popingay,
Out of my grief and my impatience
Answered neglectingly, I know not what --
He should, or he should not -- for he made me mad 
To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman 
Of guns, and drums, and wounds, God save the mark!
And telling me the sovereignest thing on earth
Was parmaciti for an inward bruise,
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpetre should be digged
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly, and but for these vile guns
He would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answered indirectly, as I said,
And I beseech you, let not his report
Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.
The circumstance considered, good my lord,
What e'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die, and never rise
To do him wrong, or any way impeach 
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners, 
That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who, on my soul, hath will fully betrayed
The lives of those that he did lead to fight
Against that great magician, damned Glendower,
Whose daughter, as we hear, that Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our coffers then
Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason? and indent with fears,
When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
For I shall never hold that man my friend
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
But by the chance of war; to prove that true
Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank, 
In single opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour 
In changing hardiment with great Glendower. 
Three times they breathed and three times did they drink,
Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,
Who then affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
Blood-stained with these valiant combatants.
Never did bare and rotten policy
Color her working with such deadly wounds, 
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly. 
Then let not him be slandered with revolt. 
Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him;
He never did encounter with Glendower.
He durst as well have met the devil alone
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland:
We license your departure with your son.
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
And if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so, for I will ease my heart,
Albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What? drunk with choler? Stay, and pause a while. 
Here comes your uncle.  Speak of Mortimer!
'Zounds, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy if I do not join with him.
Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
As high in the air as this unthankful king,
As this ingrate and cank'red Bullingbrook.
Brother, the King hath made your nephew mad.
Who strook this heat up after I was gone?
He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners,
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my wive's brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him: was not he proclaimed
By Richard, that dead is, the next of blood?
And then it was when the unhappy king 
(Whose wrongs in us God pardon!) did set forth
From whence he intercepted did return 
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.
And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
Live scandalized and foully spoken of.
But soft, I pray you, did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
Heir to the crown?  He did, myself did hear it.
Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
But shall it be that you, that set the crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man,
And for his sake wear the detested blot
Of murtherous subornation -- shall it be
That you a world of curses undergo,
Bring the agents or base second means,
The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
O, pardon me that I descend so low
To show the line and the predicament
Wherein you range under this subtile king! 
Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
Or fill up chronicles in time to come, 
That men of your nobility and power 
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As both of you -- God pardon it! -- have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
And plant this thorn, this canker, Bullingbrook?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off
By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
No, yet time serves wherein you may redeem
Your banished honors and restore yourselves
Into the good thoughts of the world again;
Revenge the jeering and disdained contempt
Of this proud king, who studies day and night
To answer all the debt he owes to you
Even with the bloody payment of your deaths.
Therefore I say -- Peace, cousin, say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
And to your quick-conceiving discontents
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventerous spirit 
As to o'erwalk a current roaring loud
On the unsteadfast footing of a spear. 
If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim. 
Send danger from the east unto the west,
So honor cross it from the north to south,
And let them grapple. O, the blood more stirs
To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
Imagination of some great exploit
Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fadom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honor by the locks,
So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
Without corrival all her dignities;
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He apprehends a world of figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend.
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
I cry you mercy.  Those same noble Scots
That are your prisoners -- I'll keep them all!
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them, 
No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not! 
I'll keep them, by this hand.   You start away,
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
Forbade my tongue to speak of Mortimer,
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear I'll hollow "Mortimer!"
I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but "Mortimer," and give it him
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullingbrook,
And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
But that I think his father loves him not
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
I would have him poisoned with a pot of ale. 
When you are better tempered to attend. 
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool 
Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
Why, look you,  I am [whipt] and scourged with rods,
Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
Of this vile politician, Bullingbrook.
In Richard's time -- what do you call the place? --
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire --
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept --
His uncle York -- where I first bowed my knee
Unto this king of smiles, this Bullingbrook --
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh --
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
"Look when his infant fortune came to age"
And "gentle Harry Percy" and "kind cousin" --
Good uncle, tell your tale -- I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again, 
We will stay your leisure.  I have done, i' faith.
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners:
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas' son your only mean
For powers in Scotland, which, for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted.  You, my lord,
Your son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble prelate well beloved,
His brother's death at Bristow, the Lord Scroop.
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on. 
I smell it. Upon my life, it will do well.
Before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip. 
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot. 
And then the power of Scotland, and of York,
To join with Mortimer, ha?  And so they shall.
In faith, it is exceedingly well aimed.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
To save our heads by raising of a head,
For bear ourselves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he doth begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does, we'll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell! No further go in this
Than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,
Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms, 
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse.
So strongly that they dare not meet each other;
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned.  Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were't not for laughing, I should pity him.
O my good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offense have I this fortnight been
A banished woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me, sweet lord, what is't that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth,
And start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks,
And given my treasures and my rights of thee
To thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers I by thee have watched,
And heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
Cry "Courage! to the field!" And thou hast talked
Of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents,
Of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
Of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, 
Of prisoners' ransom, and of soldiers slain,
And all the currents of a heady fight; 
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war, 
And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep,
That beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow,
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream,
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
And I must know it, else he loves me not.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
What horse? Roan? a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.  That roan shall be my throne.
Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir
About his title, and hath sent for you
To line his enterprise, but if you go --
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Come, come, you paraquito, answer me
Directly unto this question that I ask.
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
And if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Away, you trifler! Love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee, Kate. This is no world
To play with mammets and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses and cracked crowns, 
And pass them current too. God's me, my horse!
What say'st thou, Kate? What wouldst thou have with me? 
Do you not love me? do you not indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not,
I will not love myself. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
And when I am a' horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,
I must not have you henceforth question me
Whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must, and to conclude,
This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no farther wise
Than Harry Percy's wife; constant you are,
But yet a woman, and for secrecy,
No lady closer, for I well believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
Whither I go, thither shall you go too; 
today will I set forth, tomorrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?  It must of force. 
The man I do assure you is not here, 
For I myself at this time have employed him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
That I will by tomorrow dinner-time
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal,
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will, my lord. There are two gentlemen
Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so. If he have robbed these men,
He shall be answerable, and so farewell.
I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my lord, I think it be two a' clock.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower,
And uncle Worcester -- a plague upon it!
I have forgot the map.    No, here it is.
Sit, cousin Percy, sit, good cousin Hotspur,
For by that name as oft as Lancaster
Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale, and with
A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
I cannot blame him. At my nativity
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes
Of burning cressets, and at my birth
The frame and huge foundation of the earth
Shaked like a coward.   Why, so it would have done
At the same season if your mother's cat had 
But kittened, though yourself had never been born. 
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.
O then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth
Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb, which, for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldame earth, and topples down
Steeples and moss-grown towers. At your birth
Our grandam earth, having this distemp'rature,
In passion shook.   Cousin, of many men
I do not bear these crossings. Give me leave
To tell you once again that at my birth 
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds 
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields. 
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living, clipt in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Scotland, Wales,
Which calls me pupil or hath read to me?
And bring him out that is but woman's son
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
Peace, cousin Percy, you will make him mad.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil. 
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence. 
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil! 
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bullingbrook made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye
And sandy-bottomed Severn have I sent him
Bootless home and weather-beaten back.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too!
How scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
According to our threefold order ta'en?
The Archdeacon hath divided it
Into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
By south and east is to my part assigned;
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower; and, dear coz, to you
The remnant northward lying off from Trent. 
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
Which being sealed interchangeably 
(A business that this night may execute), 
tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I
And my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
To meet your father and the Scottish power,
As is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
Within that space you may have drawn together
Your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you, lords,
And in my conduct shall your ladies come,
From whom you now must steal and take no leave,
For there will be a world of water shed
Upon the parting of your wives and you.
Methinks my moi'ty, north from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours.
See how this river comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my land
A huge half-moon, a monstrous [cantle] out.
I'll have the current in this place dammed up, 
And here the smug and silver Trent shall run
In a new channel fair and evenly. 
It shall not wind with such a deep indent, 
To rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind? It shall, it must, you see it doth.
Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up
With like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed continent as much
As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here,
And on this north side win this cape of land,
I'll have it so, a little charge will do it.
I'll not have it alt'red.   Will not you?
No, nor you shall not.   Who shall say me nay?
I can speak English, lord, as well as you,
For I was trained up in the English court, 
Where being but young I framed to the harp
Many an English ditty lovely well, 
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament, 
A virtue that was never seen in you.
And I am glad of it with all my heart.
I had rather be a kitten and cry mew
Than one of these same metre ballet-mongers.
I had rather hear a brazen canstick turned,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge,
Nothing so much as mincing poetry.
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
I do not care. I'll give thrice so much land
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn? Shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair, you may away by night.
Break with your wives of your departure hence. 
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
So much she doteth on her Mortimer.   
Fie, cousin percy, how you cross my father! 
I cannot choose. Sometime he angers me
With telling me of the moldwarp and the ant,
Of the dreamer Merlin and his prophecies,
And of a dragon and a finless fish,
A clip-winged griffin and a moulten raven,
A couching lion and a ramping cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
As puts me from my faith. I tell you what:
He held me last night at least nine hours
In reckoning up the several devils' names
But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tired horse, a railing wife,
Worse than a smoky house. I had rather live
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
In any summer house in Christendom.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
Exceedingly well read, and profited 
In strange concealments, valiant as a lion,
And wondrous affable, and as bountiful 
As mines of India. Shall I tell you, cousin? 
He holds your temper in a high respect,
And curbs himself even of his natural scope
When you come 'cross his humor, faith, he does.
I warrant you, that man is not alive
Might so have tempted him as you have done,
Without the taste of danger and reproof.
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame,
And since your coming hither have done enough
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault;
Though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood --
And that's the dearest grace it renders you --
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage,
Defect of manners, want of government,
Pride, haughtiness, opinion, and disdain,
The least of which haunting a nobleman
Loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Well, I am schooled: good manners be your speed! 
Here come our wives, and let us take our leave. 
This is the deadly spite that angers me:
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps, she'll not part with you,
She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
Shall follow in your conduct speedily.
One that no persuasion can do good upon.
I understand thy looks. That pretty Welsh
Which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens
I am too perfect in, and but for shame,
In such a parley should I answer thee. 
I understand thy kisses, and thou mine, 
And that's a feeling disputation, 
But I will never be a truant, love,
Till I have learned thy language for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair queen in a summer's bow'r,
With ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
O, I am ignorance itself in this!
And rest your gentle head upon her lap,
And she will sing the song that pleaseth you,
And on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
Making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
As is the difference betwixt day and night
The hour before the heavenly-harnessed team
Begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart I'll sit and hear her sing.
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn. 
And those musicians that shall play to you 
Hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence, 
And straight they shall be here. Sit and attend.
Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down.
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh,
And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.
And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
A good mouth-filling oath, and leave "in sooth,"
And such protest of pepper-gingerbread,
To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow 
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn, we'll but seal,
Lords, give us leave, the Prince of Wales and I
For we shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether God will have it so
For some displeasing service I have done,
That in his secret doom, out of my blood
He'll breed revengement and a scourge for me;
But thou dost in thy passages of life 
Make me believe that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance, and the rod of heaven, 
To punish my mistreadings. Tell me else, 
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
As thou art matched withal and grafted to,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offenses with as clear excuse
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
Myself of many I am charged withal;
Yet such extenuation let me beg
As in reproof of many tales devised,
Which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear
By smiling pick-thanks and base newsmongers,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wand'red and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.
God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which do hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors. 
Thy place in Council thou hast rudely lost,
Which by thy younger brother is supplied, 
And art almost an alien to the hearts 
Of all the court and princes of my blood;
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the soul of every man
Prophetically do forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common-hackneyed in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar company,
Opinion, that did help me to the crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
But like a comet I was wond'red at,
That men would tell their children, "This is he";
Others would say, "Where, which is Bullingbrook?"
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven,
And dressed myself in such humility
That I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the crowned King. 
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new,
My presence, like a robe pontifical, 
Ne'er seen but wond'red at, and so my state, 
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast,
And wan by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping King, he ambled up and down,
With shallow jesters, and rash bavin wits,
Soon kindled and soon burnt, carded his state,
Mingled his royalty with cap'ring fools,
Had his great name profaned with their scorns,
And gave his countenance, against his name,
To laugh at gibing boys, and stand the push
Of every beardless vain comparative,
Grew a companion to the common streets,
Enfeoffed himself to popularity,
That, being daily swallowed by men's eyes,
They surfeited with honey and began
To loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little
More than a little is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
As, sick and blunted with community, 
Such as is bent on sunlike majesty 
When it shines seldom in admiring eyes; 
But rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down,
Slept in his face and rend'red such aspect
As cloudy men use to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, [gorged], and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
For thou hast lost thy princely privilege
With vile participation. Not an eye
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more,
Which now doth that I would not have it do,
Make  blind itself with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter, my thrice-gracious lord,
As thou art to this hour was Richard then
When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh,
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now by my sceptre, and my soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the state
Than thou the shadow of succession. 
For of no right, nor color like to right,
He doth fill fields with harness in the realm, 
Turns head against the lion's armed jaws, 
And being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
To bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honor hath he got
Against renowmed Douglas! whose high deeds,
Whose hot incursions and great name in arms,
Holds from all soldiers chief majority
And military title capital
Through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
Thrice hath this Hotspur, Mars in swathling clothes,
This infant warrior, in his enterprises
Discomfited great Douglas, ta'en him once,
Enlarged him and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our throne.
Capitulate against us, and are up.
But wherefore do I tell these news to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes, 
Which art my nearest and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear, 
Base inclination, and the start of spleen, 
To fight against me under Percy's pay,
To dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Do not think so, you shall not find it so,
And God forgive them that so much have swayed
Your Majesty's good thoughts away from me!
I will redeem all this on Percy's head,
And in the closing of some glorious day
Be bold to tell you that I am your son,
When I will wear a garment all of blood,
And stain my favors in a bloody mask,
Which washed away shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, when e'er it lights,
That this same child of honor and renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight,
And your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honor sitting on his helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled! For the time will come
That I shall make this northren youth exchange 
His glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord, 
To engross up glorious deeds on my behalf; 
And I will call him to so strict account
That he shall render every glory up,
Yea, even the slightest worship of his time,
Or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This in the name of God I promise here,
The which if he be pleased I shall perform,
I do beseech your Majesty may salve
The long-grown wounds of my intemperance.
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
And I will die a hundred thousand deaths
Ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this.
Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
How now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
So hath the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word
That Douglas and the English rebels met
The eleventh of this month at Shrewsbury. 
A mighty and a fearful head they are,
If promises be kept on every hand, 
As ever off'red foul play in a state. 
The Earl of Westmerland set forth today,
With him my son, Lord John of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry, you shall set forward,
On Thursday we ourselves will march. Our meeting
Is Bridgenorth. And, Harry, you shall march
Through Gloucestershire; by which account,
Our business valued, some twelve days hence
Our general forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business, let's away,
Advantage feeds him fat while men delay. 
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner-time.
Jack, meet me tomorrow in the Temple Hall
There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive 
Money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning, percy stands on high, 
And either we or they must lower lie.     
Rare words! brave world! Hostess, my breakfast, come!
O, I could wish this tavern were my drum! 
Well said, my noble Scot! If speaking truth
In this fine age were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have
As not a soldier of this season's stamp
Should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter, I do defy
The tongues of soothers, but a braver place
In my heart's love hath no man than yourself.
Nay, task me to my word, approve me, lord.
No man so potent breathes upon the ground
But I will beard him.  Do so, and tis well. -- 
What letters hast thou there? -- I can but thank you. 
Letters from him! Why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord, he is grievous sick.
'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick
In such a justling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bears his mind, not I, my [lord].
I prithee tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth,
And at the time of my departure thence
I would the state of time had first been whole
Ere he by sickness had been visited,
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now? droop now? This sickness doth infect
The very life-blood of our enterprise,
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp. 
And that his friends by deputation could not
So soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any soul removed, but on his own.
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement 
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how fortune is disposed to us, 
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now, 
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopped off --
And yet, in faith, it is not; his present want
Seems more than we shall find it. Were it good
To set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one cast? to set so rich a main
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour?
It were not good, for therein should we read
The very bottom and the soul of hope,
The very list, the very utmost bound
Of all our fortunes.   Faith, and so we should,
We may boldly spend upon the hope of what
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A rendezvous, a home to fly unto,
If that the devil and mischance look big 
Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
But yet I would your father had been here. 
The quality and hair of our attempt 
Brooks no division. It will be thought
By some that know not why he is away
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings kept the Earl from hence,
And think how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause.
For well you know we of the off'ring side
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrement,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon us.
This absence of your father's draws a curtain
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a lustre and more great opinion,
A larger dare to our great enterprise,
Than if the Earl were here, for men must think,
If we without his help can make a head 
To push against a kingdom, with his help
We shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down. 
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole. 
As heart can think. There is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul!
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmerland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.
No harm. What more?   And further, I have learned,
The King himself in person is set forth,
Or hitherwards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too. Where is his son,
The nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
And his comrades, that daffed the world aside
And bid it pass?   All furnished, all in arms;
All plumed like estridges, that with the wind 
Bated like eagles having lately bathed,
Glittering in golden coats like images, 
As full of spirit as the month of May, 
And gorgeous as the sun at midsummer;
Wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry with his beaver on,
His cushes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his seat
As if an angel [dropped] down from the clouds
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more! worse than the sun in March,
This praise doth nourish agues. Let them come!
They come like sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war
All hot and bleeding will we offer them.
The mailed Mars shall on his [altar] sit
Up to the ears in blood. I am on fire
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,
And yet not ours. Come let me taste my horse,
Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt 
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse, 
Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse. 
That Glendower were come!   There is more news:
I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,
He [cannot] draw his power this fourteen days.
That's the worst tidings that I hear of [yet].
Ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the King's whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.  Forty let it be!
My father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of us may serve so great a day.
Come let us take a muster speedily.
Doomsday is near, die all, die merrily.
Talk not of dying, I am out of fear
Of death or death's hand for this one half year.
We'll fight with him tonight.  It may not be.
You give him then advantage.  Not a whit. 
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?
So do we.  His is certain, ours is doubtful. 
Good cousin, be advised, stir not tonight.
Do not, my lord.  You do not counsel well,
You speak it out of fear and a cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas. By my life,
And I dare well maintain it with my life,
If well-respected honor bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear
Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle
Which of us fears.   Yea, or tonight.   Content.
Come, come, it may not be. I wonder much,
Being men of such great leading as you are,
That you foresee not what impediments
Drag back our expedition. Certain horse
Of my cousin Vernon,s are not yet come up.
Your uncle Worcester's horses came but today, 
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labor tame and dull, 
That not a horse is half the half of himself. 
So are the horses of the enemy
In general journey-bated and brought low.
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the King exceedeth our.
For God's sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
I come with gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt; and would to God
You were of our determination!
Some of us love you well, and even those some
Envy your great deservings and good name,
Because you are not of our quality, 
But stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so, 
So long as out of limit and true rule 
You stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge. The King hath sent to know
The nature of your griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of civil peace
Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land
Audacious cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good deserts forgot,
Which he confesseth to be manifold,
He bids you name your griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires with interest
And pardon absolute for yourself and these
Herein misled by your suggestion.
The King is kind, and well we know the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself
Did give him that same royalty he wears,
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
My father gave him welcome to the shore; 
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster, 
To sue his livery and beg his peace, 
With tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
My father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now when the lords and barons of the realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with cap and knee,
Met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
Attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
Laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths,
Gave him their heirs as pages, followed him
Even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows itself,
Steps me a little higher than his vow
Made to my father, while his blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh,
And now forsooth takes on him to reform
Some certain edicts and some strait decrees
That lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his [country's] wrongs, and by this face, 
This seeming brow of justice, did he win
The hearts of all that he did angle for; 
Proceeded further -- cut me off the heads 
Of all the favorites that the absent King
In deputation left behind him here,
When he was personal in the Irish war.
Tut, I came not to hear this. Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the King,
Soon after that, deprived him of his life,
And in the neck of that, tasked the whole state;
To make that worse, suff'red his kinsman March
(Who is, if every owner were well placed,
Indeed his king) to be engaged in Wales,
There without ransom to lie forfeited;
Disgraced me in my happy victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated mine uncle from the Council-board,
In rage dismissed my father from the court,
Broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong,
And in conclusion drove us to seek out
This head of safety, and withal to pry
Too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the King? 
Not so, Sir Walter; we'll withdraw a while. 
Go to the King, and let there be impawned
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall mine uncle
Bring him our purposes. And so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And may be so we shall.   Pray God you do.  
Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshal,
This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest
To whom they are directed. If you knew
How much they do import, you would make haste.
I guess their tenor.  Like enough you do. 
tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men 
Must bide the touch; fur, sir, at Shrewsbury, 
As I am truly given to understand,
The King with mighty and quick-raised power
Meets with Lord Harry; and I fear, Sir Michael,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose power was in the first proportion,
And what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
Who with them was a rated sinew too,
And comes not in, overruled by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
To wage an instant trial with the King.
There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester, and a head
Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
And so there is; but yet the King hath drawn
The special head of all the land together.:
The Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, 
The noble Westmerland, and warlike Blunt,
And many moe corrivals and dear men 
Of estimation and command in arms. 
Doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
I hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear,
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed;
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power he means to visit us,
For he hath heard of our confederacy,
And 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him.
Therefore make haste. I must go write again
To other friends, and so farewell, Sir Michael.
How bloodily the sun begins to peer
Above yon bulky hill! the day looks pale
At his distemp'rature.  The southern wind 
Doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the leaves 
Foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day. 
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester? 'tis not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made us doff our easy robes of peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred war?
And move in that obedient orb again
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled meteor,
A prodigy of fear, and a portent
Of broached mischief to the unborn times?
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the lag end of my life 
I have not sought the day of this dislike. 
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
It pleased your Majesty to turn your looks
Of favor from myself and all our house,
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
We were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you my staff of office did I break
In Richard's time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother, and his son,
That brought you home, and boldly did outdare
The dangers of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state,
Nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right,
The seat of Gaunt, dukedom of Lancaster.
To this we swore our aid. But in short space
It rained down fortune show'ring on your head, 
And such a flood of greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent King, 
What with the injuries of a wanton time, 
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrarious winds that held the King
So long in his unlucky Irish wars
That all in England did repute him dead;
And from this swarm of fair advantages
You took occasion to be quickly wooed
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your oath to us at Doncaster,
And being fed by us you used us so
As that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
Useth the sparrow; did oppress our nest,
Grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
That even our love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake to fly
Out of your sight and raise this present head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you yourself have forged against yourself
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth 
Sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulate, 
Proclaimed at market-crosses, read in churches, 
With some fine color that may please the eye
Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
Which gape and rub the elbow at the news
And never yet did insurrection want
Such water-colors to impaint his cause,
Nor moody beggars, starving for a time
In both your armies there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
If once they join in trial. Tell your nephew
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percy. By my hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
More active, valiant, or more valiant, young,
More daring or more bold, is now alive
To grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame, 
I have a truant been to chivalry,
And so I hear he doth account me too; 
Yet this before my father's Majesty: 
I am content that he shall take the odds
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit considerations infinite
Do make against it. No, good Worcester, no,
We love our people well, even those we love
That are misled upon your cousin's part,
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
Both he and they and you, yea, every man
Shall be my friend again, and I'll be his.
So tell your cousin, and bring me word
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
And they shall do their office. So be gone;
We will not now be troubled with reply.
We offer fair, take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life.
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
Are confident against the world in arms. 
Hence therefore, every leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them, 
And God befriend us as our cause is just! 
O no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal and kind offer of the King.
'Twere best he did.  Then are we all [undone];
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The King should keep his word in loving us.
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To punish this offense in other faults.
For treason is but trusted like the fox,
Who never so tame, so cherished and locked up,
Will have a wild trick of his ancestors.
Look how we can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like oxen at a stall, 
The better cherished, still the nearer death.
My nephew's trespass may be well forgot, 
It hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, 
And an adopted name of privilege,
A hare-brained Hotspur, governed by a spleen.
All his offenses live upon my head
And on his father's. We did train him on,
And his corruption being ta'en from us,
We as the spring of all shall pay for all.
Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know,
In any case, the offer of the King.
Deliver what you will, I'll say 'tis so.
Here comes your cousin.  My uncle is returned,
Deliver up my Lord of Westmerland.
The King will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmerland.
Marry, and shall, and very willingly.
There is no seeming mercy in the King.
I told him gently of our grievances, 
Of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn.
He calls us rebels, traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen, to arms! for I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth,
And Westmerland, that was engaged, did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the King,
And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath today
But I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me,
How showed his tasking? seemed it in contempt?
No, by my soul, I never in my life
Did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a brother should a brother dare 
To gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the duties of a man, 
Trimmed up your praises with a princely tongue, 
Spoke your deservings like a chronicle,
Making you ever better than his praise
By still dispraising praise valued with you,
And which became him like a prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself,
And chid his truant youth with such a grace
As if he mast'red there a double spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause, but let me tell the world,
If he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamored
On his follies. Never did I hear
Of any prince so wild a liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed! and, fellows, soldiers, friends,
Better consider what you have to do 
Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue,
O gentlemen, the time of life is short!
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dial's point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
And if we live, we live to tread on kings,
If die, brave death, when princes die with us!
Now for our consciences, the arms are fair
When the intent of bearing them is just.
My lord, prepare, the King comes on apace.
I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
For I profess not talking; only this --
Let each man do his best, and here draw I
A sword, whose temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal 
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war, 
And by that music let us all embrace,
For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
A second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name, that in battle thus
Thou crossest me? What honor dost thou seek
Upon my head?  Know then, my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus
Because some tell me that thou art a king.
The Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought
Thy likeness, for in stead of thee, King Harry, 
This sword hath ended him. So shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner. 
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot, 
And thou shalt find a king that will revenge
O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
I never had triumphed upon a Scot.
All's  done, all's won, here breathless lies the King.
This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well.
A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the King himself.
[A] fool go with thy soul, whither it goes!
A borrowed title hast thou bought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king?
The King hath many marching in his coats. 
Now by my sword, I will kill all his coats;
I'll murder all his wardrop, piece by piece, 
Until I meet the King.   Up and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day. 
Harry, withdraw thyself, thou bleedest too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I,  my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your Majesty make up,
Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
My Lord of Westmerland, lead him to his tent.
Come, my lord, I'll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord? I do not need your help,
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained nobility lies trodden on,
And rebels' arms triumph in massacres!
We breathe too long. Come, cousin Westmerland,
Our duty this way lies; for God's sake come. 
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster,
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point,
With lustier maintenance than I did look for 
Of such an ungrown warrior.  O, this boy 
Another king? they grow like Hydra's heads.
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colors on them. What art thou
That counterfeit'st the person of a king?
The King himself, who, Douglas, grieves at heart
So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very King. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field,
But seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee, and defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit,
And yet in faith thou bearest thee like a king.
But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be,
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like 
Never to hold it up again! The spirits
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee, 
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Cheerly, my lord, how fares your Grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton. I'll to Clifton straight.
And showed thou mak'st some tender of my life
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God, they did me too much injury
That ever said I heark'ned for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world,
And saved the treacherous labor of your son.
Make up to Clifton, I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey,                              
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name. 
My name is Harry Percy.   Why then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
[Nor] shall it, Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of us, and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
And all the budding honors on thy crest
I'll crop to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
O Harry, thou hast robbed me of my youth! 
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh.
But thoughts, the slaves of life, and life, time's fool,
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust,
For worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart!
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough. This earth that bears [thee] dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal; 
But let my favors hide thy mangled face,
And even in thy behalf I'll thank myself 
For doing these fair rites of tenderness. 
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not rememb'red in thy epitaph!
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
I could have better spared a better man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee
If I were much in love with vanity!
Death hath not strook so fat a deer today,
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowelled will I see thee by and by,
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
Come, brother John, full bravely hast thou fleshed
Thy maiden sword. But soft, whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I prithee speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st. 
Why, Percy I killed myself, and saw thee dead.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back.
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace, 
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
The trumpet sounds retrait, the day is our. 
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester, did not we send grace,
Pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain today,
A noble earl, and many a creature else 
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne 
Betwixt our armies true intelligence. 
What I have done my safety urged me to;
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too.
Other offenders we will pause upon.
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest,
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is; and I beseech your Grace
I may dispose of him.   With all my heart.
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honorable bounty shall belong. 
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free. 
His valors shown upon our crests today 
Have taught us how to cherish such high deeds
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your Grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmerland
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the check of such another day,
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.   
<ROMvs> Two households, both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life; 
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife. 
The fearful passage of their death-marked love, 
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
The which if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
No, for then we should be colliers.
I mean, and we be in choler, we'll draw.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand! 
Put up your swords, you know not what you do.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.
What, drawn and talk of peace?  I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee. 
Clubs, bills, and partisans!  Strike! Beat them down!
What noise is this? Give me my long sword ho!
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Thou villain Capulet! -- Hold me not, let me go.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stained steel -- 
Will they not hear? -- What ho, you men, you beasts! 
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins --
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate;
If ever you disturb our streets again
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart. 
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
O, where is Romeo?  Saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drive me to walk abroad,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son. 
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood. 
I, measuring his affections by my own, 
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursued my humor not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs,
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portendous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
My noble uncle do you know the cause?
I neither know it, nor can learn of him.
Have you importuned him by any means? 
Both by myself and many other friends,
But he, [his] own affections' counsellor, 
Is to himself (I will not say how true) 
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beauty to the [sun].
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.
See where he comes. So please you step aside,
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
Good morrow, cousin.  Is the day so young?
But new strook nine.  Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
It was.  What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Not having that which, having, makes them short. 
Out of her favor where I am in love.
Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?  O me! what fray was here? 
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all:
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love. 
Why then, O brawling love!  O loving hate! 
O any thing, of nothing first [create]!
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen chaos of well[-seeming] forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?   No, coz, I rather weep.
Good heart, at what?   At thy good heart's oppression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs,
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes,
Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet. 
Farewell, my coz.   Soft, I will go along; 
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong. 
Tut, I have lost myself, I am not here:
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
What, shall I groan and tell thee?  Groan? why, no;
[Bid] a sick man in sadness [make] his will --
A word ill urged to one that is so ill!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.
A right good mark-man!  And she's fair I love. 
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow, she hath Dian's wit;
And in strong proof of chastity well armed,
From Love's weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold. 
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store. 
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
She hath, and in that sparing [makes] huge waste;
For beauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
O, teach me how I should forget to think.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes:
Examine other beauties.  'Tis the way
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.
He that is strooken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair, 
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passed that passing fair? 
Farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget. 
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Of honorable reckoning are you both,
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
And too soon marred are those so early made.
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she; 
She's the hopeful lady of my earth.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart, 
My will to her consent is but a part; 
And she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love, and you, among the store
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-apparelled April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see;
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which [on] more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Come go with me.  Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona, find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say, 
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Find them out whose names are written here! 
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
[One] pain is less'ned by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
Your plantan leaf is excellent for that.
For what, I pray thee?  For your broken shin.
Shut up in prison, kept without my food, 
Whipt and tormented, and -- God-den, good fellow.
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read? 
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery. 
Perhaps you have learned it without book.
But I pray, can you read any thing you see?
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to [fires];
And these, who, often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! The all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye;
But in that crystal scales let there be weighed
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
I'll go along no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own. 
Nurse, where's my daughter?  Call her forth to me.
Now by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird!
God forbid! Where's this girl?  What, Juliet!
How now, who calls?  Your mother.   Madam, I am here,
This is the matter. Nurse, give leave a while,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again,
I have rememb'red me, thou s' hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
She's not fourteen.  I'll lay fourteen of my teeth -- 
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four --
She's not fourteen. How long is it now 
To Lammas-tide?  A fortnight and odd days.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she -- God rest all Christian souls! --
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God,
She was too good for me. But as I said,
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen,
That shall she, marry, I remember it well
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,
And she was weaned -- I never shall forget it --
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua --
Nay, I do bear a brain -- but as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out wi' th' dug!
Shake, quoth the dove-house; 'twas no need, I trow,
And since that time it is aleven years,
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood, 
She could have run and waddled all about; 
For even the day before, she broke her brow,
And then my husband -- God be with his soul!
'A was a merry man -- took up the child.
"Yea," quoth he, "dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" and by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying and said, "Ay."
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, and I should live a thousand years,
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said, "Ay." 
Enough of this, I pray thee hold thy peace.
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say, "Ay."
And yet I warrant it had upon it brow
A bump. as big as a young cock'rel's stone --
A perilous knock -- and it cried bitterly.
"Yea," quoth my husband, "fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?" It stinted and said, "Ay."
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed.
And I might live to see thee married once,
Marry, that "marry" is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your dispositions to be married?
It is an [honor] that I dream not of.
An [honor]! were not I thine only nurse, 
I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you, 
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count,
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a man
As all the world -- why, he's a man of wax.
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content;
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride 
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory, 
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story; 
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.
No less! nay, bigger: women grow by men.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make [it] fly.
We follow thee.   Juliet, the County stays. 
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? 
Or shall we on without apology?
The date is out of such prolixity:
We'll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper,
[Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance;]
But let them measure us by what they will,
We'll measure them a measure and be gone.
Give me a torch, I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles, I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
You are a lover, borrow Cupid's wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe; 
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
And, to sink in it, should you burthen love -- 
Too great oppression for a tender thing. 
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in, 
A visor for a visor! what care I
What curious eye doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Come knock and enter, and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.
A torch for me.  Let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels.
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase,
I'll be a candle-holder and look on:
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am [done].
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word.
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
[Of this sir -] reverence love, wherein thou stickest 
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Nay, that's not so.  I mean, sir, in delay 
We waste our lights in vain, [like] lights by day!
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our [five] wits.
And we mean well in going to this mask,
But 'tis no wit to go.  Why, may one ask?
I dreamt a dream tonight.  And so did I.
Well, what was yours?  That dreamers often lie.
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
O then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agot-stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men's noses as they lie asleep.
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut, 
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out a' mind the fairies' coachmakers. 
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners' legs, 
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine's wat'ry beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her waggoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a [maid].
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
[O'er] courtiers' knees, that dream on cur'sies straight;
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breath with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep
Then he dreams of another benefice
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's 
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades, 
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon 
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
And bakes the [elf-]locks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she-   Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.  True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south. 
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves:
Supper is done, and we shall come too late. 
I fear, too early, for my mind misgives 
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels, and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But He that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my [sail]!  On, lusty gentlemen!
Welcome, gentlemen!  Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk [a bout] with you.
Ah, my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance?  She that makes dainty,
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen!  I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please; 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone. 
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls. 
More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up;
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?  By'r lady, thirty years.
What, man? 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much: 
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio, 
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
'Tis more, 'tis more. His son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.  Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.
What lady's that which doth enrich the hand
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear --
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my head love till now?  Forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night. 
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave 
Come hither, covered with an antic face, 
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Why, how now, kinsman, wherefore storm you so? 
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
A villain that is hither come in spite
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Young Romeo is it?  'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
'A bears him like a portly gentleman;
And to say truth,  Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him disparagement;
Therefore be patient, take no note of him;
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast. 
It fits when such a villain is a guest.
I'Il not endure him.  He shall be endured. 
What, goodman boy?  I say he shall, go to!
Am I the master here, or you? go to!
You'll not endure him!  God shall mend my soul,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.  Go to, go to,
You are a saucy boy. Is't so indeed?
This trick may chance to scath you, I know what.
You must contrary me!  Marry, 'tis time. --
Well said, my hearts! -- You are a princox, go,
Be quiet, or -- more light, more light! -- For shame,
I'll make you quiet, what! -- Cheerly, my hearts!
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.     
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this, 
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss. 
Good Pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this:
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And Palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do,
They Pray -- grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Sin from my lips?  O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.  You kiss by th' book.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
What is her mother?  Marry, bachelor, 
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that you talked withal;
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.  Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Away, be gone, the sport is at the best.
Ay, so I fear, the more is my unrest.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e'en so? Why then I thank you all.
I thank you, honest gentlemen, good night.
More torches here!  Come on, then let's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late,
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
The son and heir of old Tiberio. 
What's he that now is going out of door?
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio. 
What's he that follows here, that would not dance?
Go ask his name. -- If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding-bed.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathed enemy.
What's tis? what's tis?  A rhyme I learnt even now
Of one I danced withal.  Anon, anon!
Come let's away, the strangers all are gone.  
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie, 
And young affection gapes to be his heir,;
That fair for which love groaned for and would die, 
With tender Juliet [matched] is now not fair. 
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new-beloved any where.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.     
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
And, on my life, hath stol'n  him home to bed. 
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.
Call, good Mercutio.  Nay, I'll conjure too. 
Romeo! humors! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh!
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but "Ay me!", [pronounce] but "love" and ["dove"], 
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and [heir],
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so [trim],
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not,
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
This cannot anger him; 'twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand 
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
Is fair and honest; in his mistress' name 
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An open[-arse], thou a pop'rin pear!
Romeo, good night, I'll to my truckle-bed,
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?  Go then, for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
But soft, what light through yonder window breaks? 
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. 
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
She speaks, yet she says nothing; what of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, [do] entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her [eyes] in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand! 
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!  Ay me!  She speaks!
O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him,
When he bestrides the lazy puffing clouds,
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, 
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this? 
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague?  It is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm nor face, [nor any other part]
What's in a name?  That which we call a rose
By any other word would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title.  Romeo, doff thy name,
And for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.  I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
What man art thou that thus bescreened in night
So stumblest on my counsel?  By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am. 
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee; 
Had I it written, I would tear the word. 
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue's uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords!  Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
I have night's cloak to hide me from their eyes, 
And but thou love me, let them find me here;
My life were better ended by their hate, 
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love. 
By whose direction foundst thou out this place?                         
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot, yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore [washed] with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,  
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke, but farewell compliment!
Dost thou love me?  I know thou wilt say, "Ay,"
And I will take thy word; yet, if thou swear'st,
Thou mayest prove false: at lovers' perjuries
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully;
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse, and say thee nay, 
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond, 
And therefore thou mayest think my behavior light, 
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have [more] coying to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheardst, ere I was ware,
My true-love passion; therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops --
O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her [circled] orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
What shall I swear by?  Do not swear at all;
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.  If my heart's dear love --
Well, do not swear.  Although I joy in thee, 
I have no joy of this contract tonight,
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden, 
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be 
Ere one can say it lightens.  Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
And yet I would it were to give again.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
But to be frank and give it thee again,
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu! 
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.       
O blessed, blessed night!  I am afeard, 
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay,
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
I come, anon. -- But if thou meanest not well,
To cease thy strife, and leave me to my grief.
tomorrow will I send.  So thrive my soul --
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light. 
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books, 
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Hist, Romeo, hist!  O, for a falc'ner's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than [mine],
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears!
Romeo!  My [niesse]?  What a' clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?  By the hour of nine.
I will not fail, 'tis twenty year till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Let me stand here till thou remember it. 
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rememb'ring how I love thy company. 
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget, 
Forgetting any other home but this.
'Tis almost morning, I would have thee gone --
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
I would I were thy bird.  Sweet, so would I,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly [sire's] close cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.                 
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, 
Check'ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light, 
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's [fiery] wheels.
Now ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find:
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified. 
Within the infant rind of this weak flower 
Poison hath residence and medicine power;
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part,
Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Good morrow, father.  Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art up-roused with some distemp'rature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right --
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight. 
That last is true -- the sweeter rest was mine.
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline? 
With Rosaline? my ghostly father, no; 
I have  forgot that name, and that name's woe.
That's my good son, but where hast thou been then?
I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy, 
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That's by me wounded; both our remedies 
Within thy help and holy physic lies. 
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for lo
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift, 
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage.  When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken?  Young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline! 
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste! 
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, 
Thy old groans yet ringing in mine ancient ears;
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed?  Pronounce this sentence then:
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
Thou chidst me oft for loving Rosaline.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And badst me bury love.  Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.
I pray thee chide me not.  Her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.  O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come go with me,
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove 
To turn your households' rancor to pure love.
O, let us hence, I stand on sudden haste. 
Wisely and slow, they stumble that run fast. 
Where the dev'l should this Romeo be?
Not to his father's, I spoke with his man.
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell
Be shrived and married.  Here is for thy pains.
This afternoon, sir?  Well, she shall be there.
And stay, good nurse -- behind the abbey wall
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell, commend me to thy mistress.
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Is your man secret?  Did you ne'er hear say, 
"Two may keep counsel, putting one away"? 
'Warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
The clock strook nine when I did send the nurse;
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him -- that's not so.
O, she is lame!  Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills;
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is [three] long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
But old folks -- many feign as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him?  Send thy man away. 
Now, good sweet nurse -- O Lord, why lookest thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
I am a-weary, give me leave a while.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I!
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nay, come, I pray thee speak, good, good nurse, speak.
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay a while?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad?  Answer to that.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad? 
No, no!  But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?
Lord, how my head aches!  What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back a' t' other side -- ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet,  sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
An' a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And, I warrant, a virtuous -- Where is your mother?
Where is my mother! why, she is within,
Where should she be?  How oddly thou repliest! 
"Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
'Where is your mother?"'   O God's lady dear! 
Are you so hot?  Marry, come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Here's such a coil!  Come, what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence' cell,
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church, I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
Go, I'll to dinner, hie you to the cell.
Hie to high fortune!  Honest nurse, farewell.
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not! 
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can, 
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady.  O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint;
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Good even to my ghostly confessor. 
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both. 
As much to him, else is his thanks too much. 
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor air, and let rich [music's] tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament;
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.    
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire. 
The day is hot, the Capels [are] abroad,
And if we meet we shall not scape a brawl, 
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring. 
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze; 
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Well, peace be with you, sir, here comes my man.
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting.  Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell, I see thou knowest me not.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.
I do protest I never injuried thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love,
And so, good Capulet -- which name I tender
As dearly as mine own -- be satisfied.
O calm, dishonorable, vile submission!
Alla stoccato carries it away.                 
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk? 
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt!  Good Mercutio!  I am hurt.
A plague a' both houses!  I am sped.
Is he gone and hath nothing?  What, art thou hurt?
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch, marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page?  Go, villain, fetch a surgeon. 
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint.  A plague a' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me.  I have it,
This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stained
With Tybalt's slander -- Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin!  O sweet Juliet, 
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate,
And in my temper soft'ned valor's steel! 
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead!
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
This day's black fate on moe days doth depend,
This but begins the woe others must end.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
He [gone] in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire[-eyed] fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the "villain" back again
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Thou wretched boy, that didst consort him here,                         
Shalt with him hence.  This shall determine that.
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed, the Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken.  Hence be gone, away!
O, I am fortune's fool!  Why dost thou stay?   
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.  Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in the Prince's name, obey.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
O noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child! 
O Prince!  O husband!  O, the blood is spilled
Of my dear kinsman!  Prince, as thou art true, 
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague. 
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay!
Romeo that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure; all this, uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it.  Romeo he cries aloud,
"Hold, friends! friends, part!"  and swifter than his tongue,  
His [agile] arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm 
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled; 
But by and by comes back to Romeo, 
Who had but newly entertained revenge,
And to't they go like lightning, for, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
And as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
He is a kinsman to the Montague,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give:
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.  And for that offense
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hearts' proceeding; 
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine 
That you shall all repent the loss of mine. 
[I] will be deaf to pleading and excuses,
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses;
Therefore use none.  Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will;
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging; such a waggoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That [th'] runaway's eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms untalked of and unseen!
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties, or, if love be
It best agrees with night.  Come, civil night, 
Thou sober-suited matron all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match, 
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. 
Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle, till strange love grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night, come, Romeo, come, thou day in night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night,
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-browed night,
Give me my Romeo, and, when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night,
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possessed it, and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed.  So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them.  O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks 
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Now, nurse, what news?  What hast thou there? the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?  Ay, ay, the cords.
Ay me, what news?  Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ah, weraday, he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Alack the day, he's gone, he's killed, he's dead!
Can heaven be so envious?  Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot.  O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it?  Romeo!
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself?  Say thou but ay, 
Than the death[-darting] eye of cockatrice. 
I am not I, if there be such an ay, 
Or those eyes [shut], that makes thee answer ay.
If he be slain, say ay, or if not, no.
Brief sounds determine my weal or woe.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes --
God save the mark! -- here on his manly breast.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood; I sounded at the sight.
O, break, my heart, poor bankrout, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty! 
Vile earth, to earth resign, end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press [one] heavy bier! 
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had! 
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaught'red? and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that killed him, he is banished.
O God, did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
It did, it did, alas the day, it did!
O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven! wolvish ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A [damned] saint, an honorable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell 
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh? 
Was ever book containing such vile matter 
So fairly bound?  O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!  There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men, all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man?  Give me some aqua-vitae;
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!  Blistered be thy tongue
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? 
That villain cousin would have killed my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring, 
Your tributary drops belong to woe, 
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt's dead that would have slain my husband.
All this is comfort, wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murd'red me; I would forget it fain,
But O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
"Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished."
That "banished," that one word "banished,"
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts.  Tybalt's death
Was woe enough if it had ended there;
Or if sour woe delights in fellowship,
And needly will be ranked with other griefs,
Why followed not, when she said, "Tybalt's dead,"
Thy father or thy mother, nay, or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved?
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
"Romeo is banished": to speak that word,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet, 
All slain, all dead: "Romeo is banished"!
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound, 
In that word's death, no words can that woe sound. 
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Will you go to them?  I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds with tears?  Mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse, I'll to my wedding-bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Hie to your chamber.  I'll find Romeo
To comfort you, I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
I'll to him, he is hid at Lawrence' cell.
O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.    
Romeo, come forth, come forth, thou fearful man: 
Affliction is enamored of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Father, what news?  What is the Prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?  Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company!
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
What less than dooms-day is the Prince's doom?
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips --
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Ha, banishment?  Be merciful, say "death";
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death.  Do not say "banishment"!
Here from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide. 
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself. 
Hence "banished" is banished from the world, 
And world's exile is death; then "banished,,
Is death mistermed.  Calling death "banished,"
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
O deadly sin!  O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law,
And turned that black word "death" to "banishment."
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not.  More validity,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo; they may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin; 
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly; 
They are free men, but I am banished: 
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But "banished" to kill me?  "Banished"?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend professed,
To mangle me with that word "banished"?
[Thou] fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
I'll give thee armor to keep off that word:
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee though thou art banished.
Yet "banished"?  Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
O then I see that [madmen] have no ears. 
How should they when that wise men have no eyes? 
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate. 
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Arise, one knocks.  Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Not I, unless the breath of heart-sick groans
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes. 
Hark how they knock! -- Who's there? -- Romeo, arise,
Thou wilt be taken. -- Stay a while! -- Stand up;
Run to my study. -- By and by! -- God's will,
What simpleness is this? -- I come, I come!     
Who knocks so hard?  Whence come you?  What's your will?
Let me come in, and you shall know my errant. 
I come from Lady Juliet.  Welcome then.  
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where's my lady's lord? where's Romeo?
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case. O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament!  Even so lies she,
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb'ring.
Stand up, stand up, stand, and you be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Ah sir, ah sir, death's the end of all.
Spakest thou of Juliet?  How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joy 
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says 
My concealed lady to our cancelled love? 
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.   As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murther her, as that name's cursed hand
Murdered her kinsman.  O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge?  Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.  Hold thy desperate hand!
Art thou a man?  Thy form cries out thou art;
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts [denote]
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man, 
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both,
Thou hast amazed me!  By my holy order, 
I thought thy disposition better tempered. 
Hast thou slain Tybalt?  Wilt thou slay thyself,
And slay thy lady that in thy life [lives],
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why railest thou on thy birth? the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which like a usurer abound'st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax, 
Digressing from the valor of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, 
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish; 
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defense.
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead:
There art thou happy.  Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tybalt: there art thou happy.
The law that threat'ned death becomes thy friend,
And turns it to exile: there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back,
Happiness courts thee in her best array,
But like a mishaved and sullen wench,
Thou [pouts upon] thy fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go get thee to thy love as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua, 
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, 
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back 
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Go before, nurse; commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night
To hear good counsel.  O, what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Go hence, good night; and here stands all your state: 
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day [disguised] from hence. 
Sojourn in Mantua.  I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time 
Every good hap to you that chances here. 
Give me thy hand.  'Tis late; farewell, good night.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee.
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I.  Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late, she'll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.
These times of woe afford no times to woo.
Madam, good night, commend me to your daughter.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow;
tonight she's mewed up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love.  I think she will [be] ruled 
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not. 
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love,
And bid her -- mark you me? -- on We'nsday next --
But soft, what day is this?  Monday, my lord.
Monday! ha, ha! Well, We'nsday is too soon,
A' Thursday let it be -- a' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado -- a friend or two,
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Well, get you gone, a' Thursday be it then. --
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
Farewell, my lord.  Light to my chamber ho! 
Afore me, it is so very late that we
May call it early by and by.  Good night.     
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear,;
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Yond light is not day-light, I know it, I;
It is some meteor that the sun [exhaled]
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou need'st not to be gone.
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so. 
 say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow; 
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat 
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come, death, and welcome!  Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul?  Let's talk, it is not day.
It is, it is!  Hie hence, be gone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes;
O now I would they had changed voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.
O now be gone, more light and light it grows.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke, be wary, look about.          
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Farewell, farewell!  One kiss, and I'll descend. 
Art thou gone so, love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our times to come.
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee now, thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookest pale.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you; 
Dry sorrow drinks our blood.  Adieu, adieu!     
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle; 
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him 
That is renowned for faith?  Be fickle, Fortune:
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.  Ho, daughter, are you up?
Who is't that calls?  It is my lady mother.
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
Why, how now, Juliet?  Madam, I am not well.
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
Therefore have done.  Some grief shows much of love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend 
Which you weep for.  Feeling so the loss, 
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
What villain, madam?  That same villain Romeo.
Villain and he be many miles asunder. --
God pardon [him]! I do with all my heart;
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more.  I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied. 
Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him -- dead -- 
Is my poor heart, so for a kinsman vexed. 
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him!
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, beseech your ladyship?
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn, 
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church, 
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride. 
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet, and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris.  These are news indeed!
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself;
And see how he will take it at your hands. 
When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,
But for the sunset of my brother's son
How now, a conduit, girl?  What, still in tears?
Evermore show'ring?  In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind:
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body.  How now, wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Ay, sir, but she will none, she [gives] you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none?  Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest, 
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bride? 
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
How how, how how, chopped logic! What is this?
"Proud," and "I thank you," and "I thank you not,"
And yet "not proud," mistress minion you?
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion!  Out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!  Fie, fie, what, are you mad?
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Hang thee, young baggage!  disobedient wretch! 
I tell thee what: get thee to church a' Thursday, 
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me! 
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest 
That God had lent us but this only child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding! God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
And why, my Lady Wisdom?  Hold your tongue
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.
I speak no treason.  O, God-i-goden!
May not one speak?  Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
For here we need it not.  You are too hot.
God's bread, it makes me mad! Day, night, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matched; and having now provided 
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful and nobly [liened], 
Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts, 
Proportioned as one's thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer, "I'll not wed, I cannot love;
I am too young, I pray you pardon me."
But and you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near, lay hand on heart, advise.
And you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to't, bethink you, I'll not be forsworn.  
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies. 
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.     
O God! -- O nurse, how shall this be prevented? 
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me!
Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
Romeo's a dishclout to him.  An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrow my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first; or if it did not, 
Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him. 
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Lawrence' cell,
To make confession and to be absolved.
Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times?  Go, counsellor,
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy;
If all else fail, myself have power to die.     
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
You say you do not know the lady's mind?
Uneven is the course, I like it not.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little [talked] of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway;
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
I would I knew not why it should be slowed. --
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Happily met, my lady and my wife!
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife. 
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next. 
What must be shall be.  That's a certain text.
Come you to make confession to this father?
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Do not deny to him that you love me.
I will confess to you that I love him.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening mass? 
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now. 
My lord, we must entreat the time alone. 
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye;
Till then adieu, and keep this holy kiss.       
O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past [cure], past help!
O Juliet, I already know thy grief,
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands,
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time, 
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife 
Shall play the umpeer, arbitrating that 
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak, I long to die,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Hold, daughter!  I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to [slay] thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop'st with Death himself to scape from it;
And if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a charnel-house,
O'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow [chapless] skulls; 
Or bid me go into a new-made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his [shroud] -- 
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble -- 
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
Hold then.  Go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris. We'nsday is tomorrow;
tomorrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run 
A cold and drowsy humor; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease; 
No warmth, no [breath] shall testify thou livest; 
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To [wanny] ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
[In] thy best robes, uncovered on the bier,
Thou shall be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, an' he and I
Will watch thy [waking], and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame, 
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valor in the acting it. 
Give me, give me!  O, tell not me of fear! 
Hold, get you gone.  Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.  
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time. 
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence? 
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self[-willed] harlotry it is.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.  
How now, my headstrong, where have you been gadding?
Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here
To beg your pardon.   Pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Send for the County, go tell him of this.
I'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell,
And gave him what becomed love I might, 
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Why, I am glad on't, this is well, stand up. 
This is as't should be. Let me see the County; 
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
No, not till Thursday, there is time enough.
Go, nurse,  go with her, we'll to church tomorrow. 
We shall be short in our provision,
'Tis now near night. Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife;
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
I'll not to bed tonight; let me alone,
I'll play the huswife for this once. What ho!
They are all forth.  Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow.  My heart is wondrous light, 
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed. 
Ay, those attires are best, but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
What, are you busy, ho?  Need you my help?
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behoofeful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.  Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Farewell!  God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins, 
That almost freezes up the heat of life. 
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, no, this shall forbid it.  Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the friar
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is, and yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes? 
Or if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night, 
Together with the terror of the place -- 
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies fest'ring in his shroud, where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort --
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking -- what with loathsome smells,
And shrikes like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad --
O, if I [wake], shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly Play with my forefathers' joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desp'rate brains?
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crowed,
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three a' clock.
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica,
Spare not for cost.  Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed. Faith, you'll be sick tomorrow
No, not a whit.  What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick. 
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time, 
But I will watch you from such watching now. 
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what. 
Make haste, make haste.  Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Mass, and well said, a merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be logger-head.   Good [faith], 'tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would.   I hear him near.
Nurse! Wife!  What ho! What, nurse, I say! 
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up, 
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste, the bridegroom he is come already,
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet heart! why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now;
Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.  Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you.  Lady, lady, lady! 
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
O, weraday, that ever I was born! 
Some aqua-vitae ho!  My lord! my lady! 
What noise is here?  O lamentable day!
What is the matter?  Look, look! O heavy day!
O me, O me, my child, my only life!
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come.
She's dead, deceased, she's dead, alack the day!
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Hah, let me see her. Out alas, she's cold,
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
O lamentable day!  O woeful time! 
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, 
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak. 
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Ready to go, but never to return. --
O son, the night before thy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir,
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.
Have I thought [long] to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel Death hath catched it from my sight! 
O woe!    O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day 
That ever, ever, I did yet behold! 
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this.
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love, O life! not life, but love in death!
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed!
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
To murther, murther our solemnity?
O child, O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou!  Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.
Peace ho, for shame!  Confusion's [cure] lives not 
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life. 
The most you sought was her promotion,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced, 
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced 
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She's not well married that lives married long,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and as the custom is,
And in her best array, bear her to church;
For though [fond] nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
All things that we ordained festival,
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
And all things change them to the contrary.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave. 
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will. 
Faith, we may put up our pipes and begone.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For well you know this is a pitiful case.        
Ay, [by] my troth, the case may be amended.   
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. 
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead --
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think! -- 
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips 
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
News from Verona!  How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady?  Is my father well?
How doth my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Then she is well and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
And presently took post to tell it you.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Is it [e'en] so? Then I [defy] you, stars!
Thou knowest my lodging, get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses; I will hence tonight. 
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import 
Some misadventure.  Tush, thou art deceived.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
No, my good lord.  No matter, get thee gone,
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
I do remember an apothecary --
And hereabouts 'a dwells -- which late I noted
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes, and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds, 
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show. 
Noting this penury, to myself I said, 
"An" if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him."
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What ho, apothecary!   Who calls so loud?
Come hither, man.  I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats; let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them. 
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearest to die?  Famine is in thy cheeks, 
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes, 
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law,
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
I [pay] thy poverty, and not thy will.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayest not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
Farewell! Buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.      
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho! 
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua!  What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
Who bare my letter then to Romeo? 
I could not send it -- here it is again --
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee, 
So fearful were they of infection. 
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger.  Friar John, go hence,
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Now must I to the monument alone,
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come --
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!  
Give me thy torch, boy.  Hence, and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen. 
Under yond [yew] trees lay thee all along, 
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground,
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it.  Whistle then to me
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard, yet I will adventure.
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew --
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones! --
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears distilled by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning, something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight, 
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, a while. 
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
What e'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring -- a ring that I must use
In dear employment -- therefore hence be gone.
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I farther shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild, 
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea. 
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble ye. 
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that;
Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout,
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. 
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
This is that banished haughty Montague,
That murd'red my love's cousin, with which grief
It is supposed the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies.  I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee. 
Obey and go with me, for thou must die.
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither. 
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man. 
Fly hence and leave me, think upon these gone,
Let them affright thee.  I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
For I come hither armed against myself.
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
I do defy thy [conjuration],
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy! 
O Lord, they fight!  I will go call the watch.
O, I am slain!  If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.           
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode?  I think 
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so? 
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet, 
To think it was so?  O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A grave? O no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth;
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry, which their keepers call
A lightning before death! O how may I
Call this a lightning?  O my love, my wife,
Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Thou art not conquered, beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favor can I do to thee,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain 
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin!  Ah, dear Juliet, 
Why art thou yet so fair?  Shall I believe 
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,
And never from this [palace] of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids; O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavory guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Here's to my love!   O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick.  Thus with a kiss I die.
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft tonight 
Have my old feet stumbled at  graves!  Who's there?
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bliss be upon you!  Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls?  As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master,
One that you love.  Who is it?  Romeo.
How long hath he been there?  Full half an hour.
Go with me to the vault.  I dare not, sir.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Stay then, I'll go alone.  Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing. 
As I did sleep under this [yew] tree here, 
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.  Romeo!
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolored by this place of peace?
Romeo, O, pale!  Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood?  Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am.  Where is my Romeo?
I hear some noise, lady.  Come from that nest 
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict 
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away. 
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come go, good Juliet  I dare no longer stay.
Go get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here?  A cup closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after?  I will kiss thy lips,
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.
Yea, noise?  Then I'll be brief.  O happy dagger, 
This is the place, there where the torch doth burn. 
The ground is bloody, search about the churchyard.
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Go tell the Prince, run to the Capulets,
Raise up the Montagues; some others search.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes 
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Here's Romeo's man, we found him in the churchyard.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
As he was coming from this churchyard's side.
A great suspicion. Stay the friar too.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning rest?
What should it be that is so [shriked] abroad? 
O, the people in the street cry "Romeo,"
Some "Juliet," and some "Paris," and all ran 
With open outcry toward our monument. 
What fear is this  which startles in your ears?
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,  
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Search, seek, and  know how this foul murder comes.
Here is a friar, and [slaughtered] Romeo's man,
With instruments upon them, fit to open
O heavens!  O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en, for lo his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!
O me, this sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Come, Montague, for thou art early up 
To see thy son and heir now [early] down. 
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight;
Grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death. Mean time forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
And here I stand both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this. 
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale. 
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet, 
And she, there dead, [that] Romeo's faithful wife.
I married them, and their stol'n marriage-day
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her perforce
To County Paris.  Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death.  Mean time I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayed by accident, and yesternight 
Returned my letter back. Then all alone,
At the prefixed hour of her waking, 
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault, 
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know, and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed some hour before his time,
Unto the rigor of severest law.
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say to this?
I brought my master news of Juliet's death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument. 
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault, 
If I departed not and left him there. 
Give me the letter, I will look on it.
Where is the County's page that raised the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault, to die and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies?  Capulet!  Montague!
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand. 
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.  But I can give thee more, 
For I will [raise] her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
A glooming peace this morning with it brings 
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things;
Some shall be pardoned, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

